<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="draftstyle.css"/><script type="text/javascript" src="readingview.js"></script><title>Surah 13 The Thunder Ar-Rad</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="checkbox-container"><label><input type="checkbox" value="amplification"/>Amplification</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="emph"/>Emphasis</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="irony"/>Irony</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="imagery"/>Imagery</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="allusion"/>Allusion</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="contrast"/>Contrast</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="name"/>Name</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="place"/>Place</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="rhetoricalQuestion"/>Rhetorical
            Question</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="motif"/>Motif</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="anaphora"/>Anaphora</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="parallelism"/>Parallelism</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="metaphor"/>Metaphor</label><label><input type="checkbox" value="simile"/>Simile</label></div>
      <h1>Surah 13 The Thunder Ar-Rad</h1>
      <p><span>Editor:</span>Abdullah Yusuf Ali</p>
      <p><span>Translator:</span>Abdullah Yusuf Ali</p>
      <p><span>Source:</span><a href="http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/">http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/</a></p>
      <table>
         <tr>
            <th>Ayah</th>
            <th>Text</th>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>A.L.M.R. These are the signs (or verses) of the Book: that which hath been
               revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth; but
               most men believe not.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>2</td>
            <td>Allah is He Who raised the heavens
               without any pillars that ye can see; is firmly established on the throne (of authority);
               He has subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law)<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> Each one runs (its
               course) for a term appointed. He doth regulate all affairs, explaining the signs in
               detail, that ye may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>3</td>
            <td><span class="imagery highlightable">And it is He who spread out
                  the earth, and set thereon mountains standing firm and (flowing) rivers: and fruit
                  of every kind He made in pairs, two and two: He draweth the night as a veil o'er the
                  Day.</span> Behold, <span class="emph highlightable">verily</span> in these things there are signs for those
               who consider<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>4</td>
            <td><span class="imagery highlightable">And in the earth are tracts (diverse though) neighbouring, and gardens
                  of vines and fields sown with corn, and palm trees - growing out of single roots or
                  otherwise: watered with the same water,</span> yet some of them We make more
               excellent than others to eat. Behold, <span class="emph highlightable">verily</span> in these things there are
               signs for those who understand<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>If thou dost marvel (at their want of faith), strange is their saying: "When we
               are (actually) dust, shall we <span class="emph highlightable">indeed</span> then be in a creation renewed?" They
               are those who deny their Lord<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> They are those round whose necks will be
               yokes (of servitude): they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for
               aye)<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>6</td>
            <td>They ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good: Yet have come to
               pass, before them, (many) exemplary punishments<span class="emph highlightable">!</span>
               But <span class="emph highlightable">verily</span> thy Lord is full of forgiveness
               for mankind for their wrong-doing, and <span class="emph highlightable">verily</span> thy Lord is (also) strict
               in punishment.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>7</td>
            <td>And the Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" But
               thou art truly a warner, and to every people a guide.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>8</td>
            <td>Allah doth know what every female (womb) doth bear, by how much the wombs fall
               short (of their time or nber) or do exceed. Every single thing is before His sight,
               in
               (due) proportion.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>9</td>
            <td>He knoweth the unseen and that which is open: He is <span class="amplification highlightable">the
                  Great</span>, <span class="amplification highlightable">the Most High</span>.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>10</td>
            <td>It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it
               openly; whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by day.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>11</td>
            <td>For each (such person) there are (angels) in succession, before and behind him:
               They guard him by command of Allah. Allah does not change a people's lot unless they
               change what is in their hearts. But when (once) Allah willeth a people's punishment,
               there can be no turning it back, nor will they find, besides Him, any to protect.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>12</td>
            <td>It is He Who doth show you the
               lightning, by way both of fear and of hope: It is He Who
               doth raise up the clouds, heavy with (fertilising)
               rain<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>13</td>
            <td><span class="imagery highlightable">Nay, thunder repeateth His praises, and so do the angels, with awe: He
                  flingeth the loud-voiced thunder-bolts</span>, and therewith He striketh
               whomsoever He will..yet these (are the men) who (dare to) dispute about Allah, with
               the
               strength of His power (supreme)<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>14</td>
            <td>For Him (alone) is prayer in Truth:
               <span class="imagery highlightable">any others that they call upon besides Him hear them no more than if they
                  were to stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches
                  them not</span>: for the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile)
               wandering (in the mind).</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>15</td>
            <td>Whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth do prostrate themselves
               to Allah (Acknowledging subjection),- with good-will or in spite of themselves: so
               do
               their shadows in the morning and evenings.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>16</td>
            <td>Say: "Who is <span class="amplification highlightable">the Lord and Sustainer of the heavens and the
                  earth</span>?" Say: "(It is) Allah." Say: "Do ye then take (for worship)
               protectors other than Him, such as have no power either for good or for harm to
               themselves?" Say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion highlightable">"Are the blind equal with those who
                  see?</span>
               <span class="rhetoricalQuestion highlightable">Or the depths of darkness equal with light?"</span>
               <span class="rhetoricalQuestion highlightable">Or do they assign to Allah partners who have created (anything) as
                  He has created, so that the creation seemed to them similar?</span>
               Say: "Allah is <span class="amplification highlightable">the Creator of all things</span>: He is
               <span class="amplification highlightable">the One</span>, <span class="amplification highlightable">the Supreme and
                  Irresistible</span>."</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>17</td>
            <td><span class="imagery highlightable">He sends down water from the skies, and the channels flow, each
                  according to its measure: But the torrent bears away to foam that mounts up to the
                  surface.</span> Even so, from that (ore) which they heat in the fire, to make
               ornaments or utensils therewith, there is a scum likewise. Thus doth Allah (by parables)
               show forth Truth and Vanity. For the scum disappears like forth cast out; while that
               which is for the good of mankind remains on the earth. Thus doth Allah set forth
               parables.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>18</td>
            <td>For those who respond to their Lord, are (all) good things. But those who
               respond not to Him,- Even if they had all that is in the heavens and on earth, and
               as
               much more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom. For them will the reckoning be
               terrible: their abode will be Hell,- what a bed of misery<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>19</td>
            <td>Is then one who doth know that that which hath been
               revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth,
               like one who is blind? It is those who are endued with understanding
               that receive admonition;- </td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>20</td>
            <td>Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and fail not in their plighted
               word;</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>21</td>
            <td>Those who join together those things which Allah hath commanded to be joined,
               hold their Lord in awe, and fear the terrible reckoning;</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>22</td>
            <td>Those who patiently persevere, seeking the countenance of their Lord; Establish
               regular prayers; spend, out of (the gifts) We have bestowed for their sustenance,
               secretly and openly; and turn off Evil with good: for such there is the final attainment
               of the (eternal) home,-</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>23</td>
            <td>Gardens of perpetual bliss: they shall enter there, as well as the righteous
               among their fathers, their spouses, and their offspring: and angels shall enter unto
               them from every gate (with the salutation):</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>24</td>
            <td>"Peace unto you for that ye persevered in patience<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> Now how
               excellent is the final home<span class="emph highlightable">!</span>"</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>25</td>
            <td>But those who break the Covenant of Allah, after having plighted their word
               thereto, and cut asunder those things which Allah has commanded to be joined, and
               work
               mischief in the land;- on them is the curse; for them is the terrible
               home<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>26</td>
            <td>Allah doth enlarge, or grant by (strict) measure, the sustenance (which He
               giveth) to whomso He pleaseth. (The wordly) rejoice in the life of this world: But
               the
               life of this world is but little comfort in the Hereafter.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>27</td>
            <td>The Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say:
               "Truly Allah leaveth, to stray, whom He will; But He guideth to Himself those who
               turn
               to Him in penitence,-</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>28</td>
            <td>Those who believe, and whose hearts find
               satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah: for without doubt in the remembrance of
               Allah do hearts find satisfaction.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>29</td>
            <td>"For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every) blessedness, and a
               beautiful place of (final) return."</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>30</td>
            <td>Thus have we sent thee amongst a People before whom (long since) have (other)
               Peoples (gone and) passed away; in order that thou mightest rehearse unto them what
               We
               send down unto thee by inspiration; yet do they reject (Him), the <span class="amplification highlightable">Most
                  Gracious</span><span class="emph highlightable">!</span> Say: "He is my Lord<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> There is no
               god but He<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> On Him is my trust, and to Him do I turn<span class="emph highlightable">!</span>"</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>31</td>
            <td>If there were a Qur'an with which mountains were moved, or the earth were
               cloven asunder, or the dead were made to speak, (this would be the one<span class="emph highlightable">!</span>)
               But, truly, the command is with Allah in all things<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> Do not the Believers
               know, that, had Allah (so) willed, He could have guided all mankind (to the right)?
               But
               the Unbelievers,- never will disaster cease to seize them for their (ill) deeds, or
               to
               settle close to their homes, until the promise of Allah come to pass, for,
               <span class="emph highlightable">verily</span>, Allah will not fail in His promise.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>32</td>
            <td>Mocked were (many) messengers before thee: but I granted respite to the
               unbelievers, and finally I punished them: Then how (terrible) was my
               requital<span class="emph highlightable">!</span></td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>33</td>
            <td>Is then He who standeth over every soul (and knoweth) all that it doth, (like
               any others)? And yet they ascribe partners to Allah. Say:
               <span class="rhetoricalQuestion highlightable">"But name them<span class="emph highlightable">!</span> is it that ye will inform Him of
                  something he knoweth not on earth, or is it (just) a show of
                  words?"</span>
               <span class="emph highlightable">Nay!</span> to those who believe not, their pretence seems pleasing, but they are
               kept back (thereby) from the path. And those whom Allah leaves to stray, no one can
               guide.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>34</td>
            <td>For them is a penalty in the life of this world,
               but harder, truly, is the penalty of the Hereafter: and defender have
               they none against Allah.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>35</td>
            <td>The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised<span class="emph highlightable">!</span>-
               beneath it flow rivers: perpetual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade therein:
               such
               is the end of the Righteous; and the end of Unbelievers in the Fire.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>36</td>
            <td>Those to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what hath been revealed unto
               thee: but there are among the clans those who reject a part thereof. Say: "I am
               commanded to worship Allah, and not to join partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and unto Him is my
               return."</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>37</td>
            <td>Thus have We revealed it to be a judgment of authority in Arabic. Wert thou to
               follow their (vain) desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee, then wouldst
               thou find neither protector nor defender against Allah.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>38</td>
            <td>We did send messengers before thee, and appointed for them wives and children:
               and it was never the part of a messenger to bring a sign except as Allah permitted
               (or
               commanded). For each period is a Book (revealed).</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>39</td>
            <td>Allah doth blot out or confirm what He pleaseth: with Him is the Mother of the
               Book.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>40</td>
            <td>Whether We shall show thee (within thy life-time) part of what we promised them
               or take to ourselves thy soul (before it is all accomplished),- thy duty is to make
               (the
               Message) reach them: it is our part to call them to account.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>41</td>
            <td>See they not that We gradually reduce the land (in their control) from its
               outlying borders? (Where) Allah commands, there is none
               to put back His Command: and He is swift in calling to account.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>42</td>
            <td>Those before them did (also) devise plots; but in all things the
               master-planning is Allah's He knoweth the doings of every soul: and soon will the
               Unbelievers know who gets home in the end.</td>
         </tr>
         <tr>
            <td>43</td>
            <td>The Unbelievers say: "No messenger art thou." Say: "Enough for a witness
               between me and you is Allah, and such as have knowledge of the Book."</td>
         </tr>
      </table>
   </body>
</html>