<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Methodology - Quranic Stylometrics</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css" />
    </head>
    <body id="methods">
        <!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" -->
        <div class="boxed">
            <h1>Methodology</h1>
        </div>
        <div class="boxed">
            <h3>Overview of Our Tools</h3>
            <p>Digital humanities is a field concerned with the use of computational tools to
                enhance the study of humanist disciplines. For this project, we used XML to
                model our texts in a machine-readable format. We validated our markup against a schema we created to constrain the markup. 
                Then, using XSL transformations, we created SVG graphics and the XHTML output you see currently.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="boxed">
            <h3>Processing</h3>
            <p>The Qur'an is organized by chapters and verses, henceforth <span class="translit"
                >surahs</span> and <span class="translit">ayahs</span>, respectively. Because each text had to be analyzed by a human annotator
                to identify the rhetorical devices being invoked, the team confined our analysis to three surahs from each text. These surahs were selected 
                subjectively based on cultural significance and richness of the text. Our were texts sourced from the <a
                    href="http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/">Perseus Digital Library</a> under
                Creative Commons licensing. Using XML, the texts were annotated to tag instances of
                eleven different stylistic devices, shown below.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="boxed">
            <h3>Our Devices</h3>
            <ul>
                <li><p><span>Amplification:</span> This device refers to language which is used to
                    glorify God. Within the Qur'an, God is referred to by various epithets that emphasize 
                    the different attributes of God. These epithets are called the 99 names of God.</p> 
                    <p><span>Example:</span>
                    <span class="ex">"Call upon Allah or call upon the Most Compassionate—whichever you call, He has the Most Beautiful Names." (17:110) </span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Simile: </span>A comparison of two things using 'like' or 'as'.</p>
                    <p><span>Example:</span>
                    <span class="ex"> "His light is like a niche in which there is a lamp, the lamp
                        is in a crystal, the crystal is like a shining star..." (24:35)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Metaphor: </span>A comparison of two things without using 'like' or 'as'. </p>
                    <p><span>Example:</span>
                        <span class="ex"> "Guide us along the Straight Path..." (1:6)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Imagery:</span> Figurative language that creates a mental image.</p>
                    <p><span>Example:</span><span class="ex"> "Do you feel secure that He will not cause the land to swallow you up, or unleash upon you a storm of stones?" (17:68) </span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Parallelism:</span> The use of similar words, clauses, phrases, sentence
                    structure, or other grammatical elements to emphasize similar ideas in a
                    sentence. </p>
                    <p><span>Example: </span>
                        <span class="ex">"My Lord! Cause me to come in with a firm incoming and to go out with a firm outgoing." (17:80)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Anaphora:</span> The repetition of words or phrases in a group of
                    sentences, clauses, or poetic lines.</p>
                    <p><span>Example:</span><span class="ex"> "Then had we made thee taste a double
                        (punishment) of living and a double (punishment) of dying." (17:75)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Allusion:</span> A symbolical reference is called allusion. Allusion is an
                    indirect reference in a discourse by passing mention or quotation, to something
                    generally familiar.</p> 
                    <p><span>Example: </span><span class="ex">"We did bestow on some prophets more gifts than on others:
                      and We gave to David (the gift of) the Psalms." (17:55)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Contrast:</span>Emphasizes the differences between two people, places or
                    things.</p> 
                    <p><span>Example:</span><span class="ex"> "Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good;
                        for man was ever hasty." (17:11)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Irony:</span> The use of words to convey a meaning that is opposite of
                    what is actually said.</p>
                    <p><span>Example: </span><span class="ex"> "Give good news of
                        a painful punishment to hypocrites..." (4:138)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Rhetorical Question:</span> A question asked in order to create a dramatic
                    effect or to make a point rather than to get an answer.</p>
                    <p><span>Example:
                    </span><span class="ex">Is there any reward for goodness except
                        goodness?" (55:60)</span></p></li>
                
                <li><p><span>Emphasis:</span> Marker that indicates emphasis or focus of the sentence.</p>
                    <p><span>Example: </span><span class="ex">"If ye are righteous, then lo! He was ever Forgiving unto those who
                        turn (unto Him)." (17:25)</span></p></li>
            </ul>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>