<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Website/style.css"/>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Website/readingview.css"/><script type="application/javascript" src="../Website/readingview.js"></script><title>Surah17</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="checkbox-container"><label class="amplification"><input type="checkbox" id="amplification"/>Amplification</label><label class="emph"><input type="checkbox" id="emph"/>Emphasis</label><label class="irony"><input type="checkbox" id="irony"/>Irony</label><label class="imagery"><input type="checkbox" id="imagery"/>Imagery</label><label class="allusion"><input type="checkbox" id="allusion"/>Allusion</label><label class="contrast"><input type="checkbox" id="contrast"/>Contrast</label><label class="name"><input type="checkbox" id="name"/>Name</label><label class="place"><input type="checkbox" id="place"/>Place</label><label class="rhetoricalQuestion"><input type="checkbox" id="rhetoricalQuestion"/>Rhetorical Question</label><label class="motif"><input type="checkbox" id="motif"/>Motif</label><label class="anaphora"><input type="checkbox" id="anaphora"/>Anaphora</label><label class="parallelism"><input type="checkbox" id="parallelism"/>Parallelism</label><label class="metaphor"><input type="checkbox" id="metaphor"/>Metaphor</label><label class="simile"><input type="checkbox" id="simile"/>Simile</label></div>
      <section>
         <h2>Arabic</h2>
         <h2>Ali</h2>
         <h2>Pickthall</h2>
      </section>
      <main>(1) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ</span> سُبْحَانَ
            الَّذِي أَسْرَىٰ بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلًا مِنَ <span class="place">الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ</span> إِلَى
            <span class="place">الْمَسْجِدِ الْأَقْصَى</span> الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ
            آيَاتِنَا ۚ إِنَّهُ هُوَ <span class="amplification">السَّمِيعُ</span>
            <span class="amplification">الْبَصِيرُ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Glory to (Allah)</span> Who did take His servant for a Journey by night from the
            Sacred Mosque to the farthest Mosque, whose precincts We did bless,- in order that
            We
            might show him some of Our Signs: for He is the One Who heareth and seeth (all
            things).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable Place of
            Worship to the Far distant place of worship the neighbourhood whereof We have blessed,
            that We might show him of Our tokens<span class="emph">!</span>
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span> He, only He, is <span class="amplification">the Hearer</span>,
            <span class="amplification">the Seer</span>. </div>(2) 
         <div lang="ar">وَآتَيْنَا <span class="name">مُوسَى</span> الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلْنَاهُ هُدًى <span class="name">لِبَنِي
               إِسْرَائِيل</span>َ أَلَّا تَتَّخِذُوا مِنْ دُونِي وَكِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> We gave <span class="name">Moses</span> the Book, and made it a Guide to the Children of
            <span class="place">Israel</span>, (commanding): "Take not other than Me as Disposer of (your)
            affairs."</div>
         <div lang="en"> We gave unto <span class="name">Moses</span> the Scripture, and We appointed it a guidance
            for the children of Israel, saying: Choose no guardian beside Me. </div>(3) 
         <div lang="ar">ذُرِّيَّةَ مَنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ <span class="name">نُوحٍ</span> ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَبْدًا
            شَكُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">O</span> ye that are sprung from those whom We carried (in the Ark) with
            <span class="name">Noah</span><span class="emph">!</span>
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> he was a devotee most grateful.</div>
         <div lang="en"> (They were) the seed of those whom We carried (in the ship) along with
            <span class="name">Noah</span>. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> he was a grateful slave. </div>(4) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَىٰ <span class="name">بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ</span> فِي الْكِتَابِ لَتُفْسِدُنَّ
            فِي الْأَرْضِ مَرَّتَيْنِ وَلَتَعْلُنَّ عُلُوًّا كَبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We gave (Clear) Warning to the <span class="name">Children of Israel</span> in the Book,
            that <span class="parallelism">twice would they do mischief on the earth and be
               elated with mighty arrogance (and twice would they be
               punished)<span class="emph">!</span></span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And We decreed for the <span class="name">Children of Israel</span> in the Scripture: Ye
            verily will work corruption in the earth twice, and ye will become great tyrants.
            </div>(5) 
         <div lang="ar">فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ أُولَاهُمَا بَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَادًا لَنَا أُولِي
            بَأْسٍ شَدِيدٍ فَجَاسُوا خِلَالَ الدِّيَارِ ۚ وَكَانَ وَعْدًا مَفْعُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> When the first of the warnings came to pass, We sent against you Our servants
            given to terrible warfare: They entered the very inmost parts of your homes; and it
            was
            a warning (completely) fulfilled.</div>
         <div lang="en"> So when the time for the first of the two came, We roused against you slaves of
            Ours of great might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a threat performed. </div>(6) 
         <div lang="ar">ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ
            وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Then did We grant you the Return as against them: We gave you increase in
            resources and sons, and made you the more numerous in man-power.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Then we gave you once again your turn against them, and We aided you with
            wealth and children and made you more in soldiery. </div>(7) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="anaphora">إِنْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ أَحْسَنْتُمْ
               لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ</span> ۖ وَإِنْ أَسَأْتُمْ فَلَهَا ۚ فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ
            الْآخِرَةِ لِيَسُوءُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ وَلِيَدْخُلُوا <span class="place">الْمَسْجِد</span>َ <span class="simile">كَمَا دَخَلُوهُ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ</span> وَلِيُتَبِّرُوا مَا
            عَلَوْا تَتْبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> If <span class="anaphora">ye did well, ye did well for yourselves; if ye
               did evil, (ye did it) against yourselves. </span> So when the second of the
            warnings came to pass, (We permitted your enemies) <span class="metaphor">to
               disfigure your faces</span>, and to <span class="simile">enter your
               Temple as they had entered it before</span>, and to visit with destruction all
            that fell into their power.</div>
         <div lang="en"> (Saying): <span class="anaphora">If ye do good, ye do good
               </span>for your own souls, and if ye do evil, it is for them (in like manner). So,
            when the time for the second (of the judgments) came (We roused against you others
            of
            Our slaves) to ravage you, and <span class="simile">to enter the Temple even as
               they entered it the first time</span>, and to <span class="anaphora">lay waste all that they conquered with an utter wasting.</span>
            </div>(8) 
         <div lang="ar">عَسَىٰ رَبُّكُمْ أَنْ يَرْحَمَكُمْ ۚ وَإِنْ <span class="anaphora">عُدْتُمْ عُدْنَا</span> ۘ وَجَعَلْنَا جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ
            حَصِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> It may be that your Lord may (yet) show Mercy unto you; <span class="parallelism">but if ye revert (to your sins), We shall revert (to Our
               punishments):</span> And we have made Hell a prison for those who reject (all
            Faith).</div>
         <div lang="en"> It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if <span class="parallelism">ye repeat (the crime) We shall repeat (the
               punishment)</span>, and We have appointed hell a dungeon for the disbelievers. </div>(9) 
         <div lang="ar">إِنَّ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنَ يَهْدِي لِلَّتِي هِيَ أَقْوَمُ وَيُبَشِّرُ
            الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ أَجْرًا كَبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> this Qur'an doth guide to that which is most right (or stable), and
            giveth the Glad Tidings to the Believers who work deeds of righteousness, that they
            shall have a magnificent reward;</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span> this Qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest, and giveth tidings
            unto the believers who do good works that theirs will be a great reward. </div>(10) 
         <div lang="ar">وَأَنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ أَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ عَذَابًا
            أَلِيمًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And to those who believe not in the Hereafter, (it announceth) that We have
            prepared for them a Penalty Grievous (indeed).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And that those who believe not in the Hereafter, for them We have prepared a
            painful doom. </div>(11) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="contrast">وَيَدْعُ الْإِنْسَانُ بِالشَّرِّ دُعَاءَهُ
               بِالْخَيْرِ</span> ۖ وَكَانَ الْإِنْسَانُ عَجُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony">The prayer that man should make for good, he maketh for evil;</span> for man is
            given to hasty (deeds).</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="contrast">Man prayeth for evil as he prayeth for good</span>;
            for man was ever hasty. </div>(12) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ آيَتَيْنِ ۖ
               فَمَحَوْنَا آيَةَ اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَا آيَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً لِتَبْتَغُوا
               فَضْلًا مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَلِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ</span> ۚ
            وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ فَصَّلْنَاهُ تَفْصِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">We have made the Night and the Day as two (of Our)
               Signs: the Sign of the Night have We obscured, while the Sign of the Day We have
               made to enlighten you; that ye may seek bounty from your Lord, and that ye may know
               the number and count of the years:</span> all things have We explained in
            detail.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We appoint the night and the day two portents. Then We make dark the
            portent of the night, and We make the portent of the day sight-giving, that ye may
            seek
            bounty from your Lord, and that ye may know the computation of the years, and the
            reckoning; and everything have <span class="anaphora">We expounded with a clear
               expounding</span>.</div>(13) 
         <div lang="ar">وَكُلَّ إِنْسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ <span class="metaphor">طَائِرَهُ</span> فِي عُنُقِهِ ۖ وَنُخْرِجُ لَهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كِتَابًا
            يَلْقَاهُ مَنْشُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Every man's fate We have fastened on his own neck: On the Day of Judgment We
            shall bring out for him a scroll, which he will see spread open.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And every man's augury have We fastened to his own neck, and We shall bring
            forth for him on the Day of Resurrection a book which he will find wide open. </div>(14) 
         <div lang="ar">اقْرَأْ كِتَابَكَ كَفَىٰ بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيبًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> (It will be said to him:) "Read thine (own) record: Sufficient is thy soul
            this day to make out an account against thee."</div>
         <div lang="en"> (And it will be said unto him): Read thy Book. Thy soul sufficeth as reckoner
            against thee this day. </div>(15) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">مَنِ اهْتَدَىٰ فَإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدِي لِنَفْسِهِ
               ۖ وَمَنْ ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا</span>
            <span class="anaphora">وَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَىٰ</span> ۗ
            وَمَا كُنَّا مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّىٰ نَبْعَثَ رَسُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">Who receiveth guidance, receiveth it for his own
               benefit: who goeth astray doth so to his own loss</span>: <span class="anaphora">No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another</span>:
            nor would We visit with Our Wrath until We had sent an messenger (to give
            warning).</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">Whosoever goeth right, it is only for (the good of) his
               own soul that he goeth right, and whosoever erreth, erreth only to its
               hurt.</span> No laden soul can bear another's load, We never punish until we
            have sent a messenger. </div>(16) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِذَا أَرَدْنَا أَنْ نُهْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا فَفَسَقُوا
            فِيهَا فَحَقَّ عَلَيْهَا الْقَوْلُ فَدَمَّرْنَاهَا تَدْمِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> When We decide to destroy a population, We (first) send a definite order to
            those among them who are given the good things of this life and yet transgress; so
            that
            the word is proved true against them: then (it is) We destroy them utterly.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And when We would destroy a township We send commandment to its folk who live
            at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein, and so the Word (of doom)
            hath
            effect for it, and <span class="anaphora">we annihilate it with complete
               annihilation</span>. </div>(17) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="rhetoricalQuestion">وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنَ الْقُرُونِ مِنْ بَعْدِ
               <span class="name">نُوحٍ</span></span> ۗ وَكَفَىٰ بِرَبِّكَ بِذُنُوبِ عِبَادِهِ
            <span class="amplification">خَبِيرًا</span>
            <span class="amplification">بَصِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">How many generations have We destroyed after
               <span class="name">Noah</span>?</span> and enough is thy Lord to note and see the
            sins of His servants.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">How many generations have We destroyed since
               Noah<span class="emph">!</span></span> And Allah sufficeth as
            <span class="amplification">Knower</span> and <span class="amplification">Beholder</span> of
            the sins of His slaves. </div>(18) 
         <div lang="ar">مَنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ <span class="anaphora">الْعَاجِلَةَ
               عَجَّلْنَا</span> لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَاءُ لِمَنْ نُرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ
            جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَاهَا <span class="motif">مَذْمُومًا
               مَدْحُورًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> If any do wish for the transitory things (of this life), We readily grant them
            - <span class="anaphora">such things as We will, to such person as We
               will</span>: in the end have We provided Hell for them: they will burn
            therein, <span class="motif">disgraced and rejected</span>.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Whoso desireth that (life) which hasteneth away, We hasten for him therein
            what We will for whom We please. And afterward We have appointed for him hell; he
            will
            endure the heat thereof, <span class="motif">condemned, rejected.</span>
            </div>(19) 
         <div lang="ar">وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الْآخِرَةَ <span class="anaphora">وَسَعَىٰ لَهَا
               سَعْيَهَا</span> وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُمْ
            مَشْكُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those who do wish for the (things of) the Hereafter, and <span class="anaphora">strive therefore with all due striving,</span> and have
            Faith,- they are the ones whose striving is acceptable (to Allah).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And whoso desireth the Hereafter and striveth for it with the effort
            necessary, being a believer; for such, their effort findeth favour (with their Lord).
            </div>(20) 
         <div lang="ar">كُلًّا نُمِدُّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ وَهَٰؤُلَاءِ <span class="anaphora">مِنْ
               عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ ۚ وَمَا كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ</span> مَحْظُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Of the bounties of thy Lord We bestow freely on all- These as well as those:
            The bounties of thy Lord are not closed (to anyone).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Each do We supply, both these and those, from <span class="anaphora">
               the bounty of thy Lord. And the bounty of thy Lord </span>can never be walled
            up. </div>(21) 
         <div lang="ar">انْظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَلَلْآخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ
            دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> See how We have bestowed more on some than on others; but <span class="emph">verily</span>
            the Hereafter is more in rank and gradation and more in excellence.</div>
         <div lang="en"> See how We prefer one of them above another, and verily the Hereafter will be
            greater in degrees and greater in preferment.</div>(22) 
         <div lang="ar">لَا تَجْعَلْ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَتَقْعُدَ <span class="motif">مَذْمُومًا مَخْذُولًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Take not with Allah another object of worship; or thou (<span class="emph">O man!</span>)
            wilt sit in disgrace and destitution.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Set not up with Allah any other god (<span class="emph">O</span> man) lest thou <span class="motif">sit down reproved, forsaken.</span></div>(23) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقَضَىٰ رَبُّكَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
            إِحْسَانًا ۚ إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِنْدَكَ الْكِبَرَ أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ كِلَاهُمَا فَلَا
            تَقُلْ لَهُمَا أُفٍّ وَلَا تَنْهَرْهُمَا وَقُلْ لَهُمَا قَوْلًا كَرِيمًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none but Him, and that ye be kind to
            parents. Whether one or both of them attain old age in thy life, say not to them a
            word
            of contempt, nor repel them, but address them in terms of honour.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Thy Lord hath decreed, that ye worship none save Him, and (that ye show)
            kindness to parents. If one of them or both of them attain old age with thee, say
            not
            "Fie" unto them nor repulse them, but speak unto them a gracious word. </div>(24) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="metaphor">وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ</span>
            مِنَ الرَّحْمَةِ وَقُلْ رَبِّ ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And, out of kindness, <span class="metaphor">lower to them the wing of
               humility</span>, and say: "My Lord<span class="emph">!</span> bestow on them thy Mercy even
            as they cherished me in childhood."</div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="metaphor">lower unto them the wing of submission
               through mercy</span>, and say: My Lord<span class="emph">!</span> Have mercy on them both
            as they did care for me when I was little. </div>(25) 
         <div lang="ar">رَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا فِي نُفُوسِكُمْ ۚ إِنْ تَكُونُوا صَالِحِينَ فَإِنَّهُ
            كَانَ لِلْأَوَّابِينَ غَفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Your Lord <span class="amplification">knoweth best</span> what is in your hearts:
            If ye do deeds of righteousness, <span class="emph">verily</span> He is <span class="amplification">Most
               Forgiving</span> to those who turn to Him again and again (in true
            penitence).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Your Lord is <span class="amplification">Best Aware</span> of what is in your
            minds. If ye are righteous, then <span class="emph">lo!</span> He was ever Forgiving unto those who
            turn (unto Him). </div>(26) 
         <div lang="ar">وَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَىٰ حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلَا تُبَذِّرْ
            تَبْذِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And render to the kindred their due rights, as (also) to those in want, and to
            the wayfarer: But squander not (your wealth) in the manner of a spendthrift.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Give the kinsman his due, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and squander not
            (thy wealth) in wantonness. </div>(27) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="metaphor">إِنَّ الْمُبَذِّرِينَ كَانُوا إِخْوَانَ
               الشَّيَاطِينِ</span> ۖ وَكَانَ الشَّيْطَانُ لِرَبِّهِ كَفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Verily</span>
            <span class="metaphor">spendthrifts are brothers of the Evil Ones</span>;
            and the <span class="allusion">Evil One</span> is to his Lord (himself) ungrateful.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span><span class="metaphor"> the squanderers were ever brothers of the
               devils</span>, and the devil was ever an ingrate to his Lord. </div>(28) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِمَّا تُعْرِضَنَّ عَنْهُمُ ابْتِغَاءَ رَحْمَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّكَ تَرْجُوهَا
            فَقُلْ لَهُمْ قَوْلًا مَيْسُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And even if thou hast to turn away from them in pursuit of the Mercy from thy
            Lord which thou dost expect, yet speak to them a word of easy kindness.</div>
         <div lang="en"> But if thou turn away from them, seeking mercy from thy Lord, for which thou
            hopest, then speak unto them a reasonable word. </div>(29) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="metaphor">وَلَا تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَىٰ عُنُقِكَ
               وَلَا تَبْسُطْهَا كُلَّ الْبَسْطِ فَتَقْعُدَ</span><span class="motif">
               مَلُومًا مَحْسُورًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="simile">Make not thy hand tied (like a niggard's) to thy
               neck,</span> nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach, so that thou become
            blameworthy and destitute.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="metaphor">let not thy hand be chained to thy
               neck</span> nor <span class="anaphora">open it with a complete
               opening</span>, lest thou <span class="motif">sit down rebuked,
               denuded</span>. </div>(30) 
         <div lang="ar">إِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ
            بِعِبَادِهِ <span class="amplification">خَبِيرًا</span><span class="amplification">
               بَصِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> thy Lord doth provide sustenance in abundance for whom He pleaseth,
            and He provideth in a just measure. For <span class="amplification">He doth know and regard
               all</span> His servants.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span> thy Lord enlargeth the provision for whom He will, and straiteneth (it
            for whom He will). <span class="emph">Lo</span>, He was ever <span class="amplification">Knower</span>,
            <span class="amplification">Seer</span> of His slaves. </div>(31) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ خَشْيَةَ إِمْلَاقٍ ۖ نَحْنُ نَرْزُقُهُمْ
            وَإِيَّاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ قَتْلَهُمْ كَانَ خِطْئًا كَبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Kill not your children for fear of want: We shall provide sustenance for them
            as well as for you. <span class="emph">Verily</span> the killing of them is a great sin.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Slay not your children, fearing a fall to poverty, We shall provide for them
            and for you. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> the slaying of them is great sin. </div>(32) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَقْرَبُوا الزِّنَا ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَسَاءَ سَبِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Nor come nigh to adultery: for it is a shameful (deed) and an evil, opening
            the road (to other evils).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And come not near unto adultery. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> it is an abomination and an
            evil way. </div>(33) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۗ وَمَنْ
            قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلَا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ
            ۖ
            إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنْصُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Nor take life - which Allah has made sacred - except for just cause. And if
            anyone is slain wrongfully, we have given his heir authority (to demand qisas or to
            forgive): but let him not exceed bounds in the matter of taking life; for he is helped
            (by the Law).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And slay not the life which Allah hath forbidden save with right. Whoso is
            slain wrongfully, We have given power unto his heir, but let him not commit excess
            in
            slaying. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> he will be helped. </div>(34) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَقْرَبُوا مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ حَتَّىٰ
            يَبْلُغَ أَشُدَّهُ ۚ وَأَوْفُوا بِالْعَهْدِ ۖ إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ مَسْئُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Come not nigh to the orphan's property except to improve it, until he attains
            the age of full strength; and fulfil (every) engagement, for (every) engagement will
            be
            enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Come not near the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better till he
            come to strength; and keep the covenant. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> of the covenant it will be
            asked. </div>(35) 
         <div lang="ar">وَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ إِذَا كِلْتُمْ وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ الْمُسْتَقِيمِ ۚ
            ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="anaphora">Give full measure when ye measure</span>, and weigh
            with a balance that is straight: that is the most fitting and the most advantageous
            in
            the final determination.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="anaphora">Fill the measure when ye measure</span>, and weigh
            with a right balance; that is meet, and better in the end. </div>(36) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ ۚ <span class="motif">إِنَّ
               السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ وَالْفُؤَادَ</span> كُلُّ أُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ
            مَسْئُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And pursue not that of which thou hast no knowledge; <span class="motif">for every act of hearing, or of seeing or of (feeling in) the
               heart</span> will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning).</div>
         <div lang="en"> (<span class="emph">O</span> man), follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge.
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span>
            <span class="motif">the hearing and the sight and the heart</span> - of
            each of these it will be asked. </div>(37) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَا تَمْشِ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَرَحًا ۖ <span class="imagery">إِنَّكَ لَنْ تَخْرِقَ
               الْأَرْضَ وَلَنْ تَبْلُغَ الْجِبَالَ طُولًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Nor walk on the earth with insolence: for thou canst not rend the earth
            asunder, nor reach the mountains in height.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And walk not in the earth exultant. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> thou canst not rend the
            earth, nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills. </div>(38) 
         <div lang="ar">كُلُّ ذَٰلِكَ كَانَ سَيِّئُهُ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ مَكْرُوهًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Of all such things the evil is hateful in the sight of thy Lord.</div>
         <div lang="en"> The evil of all that is hateful in the sight of thy Lord. </div>(39) 
         <div lang="ar">ذَٰلِكَ مِمَّا أَوْحَىٰ إِلَيْكَ رَبُّكَ مِنَ الْحِكْمَةِ ۗ وَلَا تَجْعَلْ مَعَ
            اللَّهِ إِلَٰهًا آخَرَ فَتُلْقَىٰ فِي جَهَنَّمَ <span class="motif">مَلُومًا
               مَدْحُورًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> These are among the (precepts of) wisdom, which thy Lord has revealed to thee.
            Take not, with Allah, another object of worship, lest thou shouldst be thrown into
            Hell,
            <span class="motif">blameworthy and rejected.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> This is (part) of that wisdom wherewith thy Lord hath inspired thee
            (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>). And set not up with Allah any other god, lest thou be cast into
            hell, <span class="motif">reproved, abandoned.</span>
            </div>(40) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="rhetoricalQuestion">أَفَأَصْفَاكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ وَاتَّخَذَ مِنَ
               الْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنَاثًا</span> ۚ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَقُولُونَ قَوْلًا
            عَظِيمًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Has then your Lord (<span class="emph">O Pagans!</span>) preferred for you sons,
               and taken for Himself daughters among the angels?</span>
            <span class="emph">Truly</span> ye utter a most dreadful saying<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Hath your Lord then distinguished you (<span class="emph">O</span> men of Makka)
               by giving you sons, and hath chosen for Himself females from among the
               angels?</span>
            <span class="emph"> Lo!</span>
            <span class="emph">verily</span> ye speak an awful word<span class="emph">!</span>
            </div>(41) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدْ صَرَّفْنَا فِي هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ لِيَذَّكَّرُوا وَمَا يَزِيدُهُمْ
            إِلَّا نُفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony">We have explained (things) in various (ways) in this Qur'an, in order that they
               may receive admonition, but it only increases their flight (from the
               Truth)<span class="emph">!</span></span></div>
         <div lang="en"> We <span class="emph">verily</span> have displayed (Our warnings) in this Qur'an that they
            may take heed, but it increaseth them in naught save aversion. </div>(42) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ لَوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ آلِهَةٌ كَمَا يَقُولُونَ إِذًا لَابْتَغَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِي
            الْعَرْشِ سَبِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: If there had been (other) gods with Him, as they say,- behold, they would
            certainly have sought out a way to the <span class="amplification">Lord of the
               Throne</span><span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Say (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>, to the disbelievers): If there were other gods along with Him, as
            they say, then had they sought a way against the <span class="amplification">Lord of the
               Throne</span>. </div>(43) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَىٰ عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ عُلُوًّا
               كَبِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Glory to Him<span class="emph">!</span> He is high above all that they say<span class="emph">!</span>-
            <span class="amplification">Exalted</span> and <span class="amplification">Great</span>
            (beyond measure)<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Glorified is He, and <span class="amplification">High Exalted</span> above what
            they say<span class="emph">!</span>
            </div>(44) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ
               فِيهِنَّ ۚ وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا تَفْقَهُونَ
               تَسْبِيحَهُمْ ۗ إِنَّهُ كَانَ <span class="amplification">حَلِيمًا</span>
               <span class="amplification">غَفُورًا</span></span></div>
         <div lang="en"> The seven heavens and the earth, and all beings therein, declare His
            glory:there is not a thing but celebrates His praise; And yet ye understand not how
            they
            declare His glory<span class="emph">!</span>
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> He is <span class="amplification">Oft-Forbear</span>,
            <span class="amplification">Most Forgiving</span><span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="imagery">The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein praise
               Him</span>, and there is not a thing but hymneth His praise; but ye understand
            not their praise. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> He is ever <span class="amplification">Clement</span>,
            <span class="amplification">Forgiving</span>. </div>(45) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ جَعَلْنَا بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ لَا
            يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ حِجَابًا مَسْتُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">When thou dost recite the Qur'an, We put, between thee and those who believe
            not in the Hereafter, a veil invisible:</div>
         <div lang="en"> And when thou recitest the Qur'an we place between thee and those who believe
            not in the Hereafter a hidden barrier; </div>(46) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="metaphor">وَجَعَلْنَا عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ أَكِنَّةً أَنْ
               يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرًا</span> ۚ وَإِذَا ذَكَرْتَ رَبَّكَ فِي
            الْقُرْآنِ وَحْدَهُ وَلَّوْا عَلَىٰ أَدْبَارِهِمْ نُفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="metaphor"> And We put coverings over their hearts (and
               minds) lest they should understand the Qur'an, and deafness into their
               ears:</span> when thou dost commemorate thy Lord and Him alone in the Qur'an,
            they turn on their backs, fleeing (from the Truth).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We place upon their hearts veils lest they should understand it, and in
            their ears a deafness; and when thou makest mention of thy Lord alone in the Qur'an,
            they turn their backs in aversion. </div>(47) 
         <div lang="ar">نَحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَسْتَمِعُونَ بِهِ إِذْ يَسْتَمِعُونَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِذْ
            هُمْ نَجْوَىٰ إِذْ يَقُولُ الظَّالِمُونَ إِنْ تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا رَجُلًا
            مَسْحُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> We know best why it is they listen, when they listen to thee; and when they
            meet in private conference, behold, the wicked say, "Ye follow none other than a man
            bewitched<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> We are Best Aware of what they wish to hear when they give ear to thee and
            when they take secret counsel, when the evil-doers say: Ye follow but a man bewitched.
            </div>(48) 
         <div lang="ar">انْظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الْأَمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلَا يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
            سَبِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> See what similes they strike for thee: but they have gone astray, and never
            can they find a way.</div>
         <div lang="en"> See what similitudes they coin for thee, and thus are all astray, and
            <span class="imagery">cannot find a road<span class="emph">!</span></span>
            </div>(49) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقَالُوا أَإِذَا كُنَّا عِظَامًا وَرُفَاتًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ خَلْقًا
            جَدِيدًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> They say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">What<span class="emph">!</span>when we are reduced to bones
               and dust, should we really be raised up (to be) a new
               creation?"</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And they say: When <span class="metaphor">we are bones and
               fragments</span>, shall we forsooth, be <span class="imagery">raised up as a new
               creation?</span>
            </div>(50) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ كُونُوا حِجَارَةً أَوْ حَدِيدًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "(<span class="emph">Nay!</span>) be ye stones or iron,</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: <span class="metaphor">Be ye stones or iron </span>
            </div>(51) 
         <div lang="ar">أَوْ خَلْقًا مِمَّا يَكْبُرُ فِي صُدُورِكُمْ ۚ فَسَيَقُولُونَ مَنْ يُعِيدُنَا ۖ
            قُلِ الَّذِي فَطَرَكُمْ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ ۚ فَسَيُنْغِضُونَ إِلَيْكَ رُءُوسَهُمْ
            وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَىٰ هُوَ ۖ قُلْ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَكُونَ قَرِيبًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> "Or created matter which, in your minds, is hardest (to be raised up),- (Yet
            shall ye be raised up)<span class="emph">!</span>" then will they say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"Who will
               cause us to return?"</span> Say: "He who created you
            first<span class="emph">!</span>" Then will they wag their heads towards thee, and
            say,<span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"When will that be?"</span> Say, "May be it
            will be quite soon<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Or some created thing that is yet greater in your thoughts<span class="emph">!</span> Then
            they will say: Who shall bring us back (to life). Say: He Who created you at the first.
            Then will they shake their heads at thee, and say: When will it be? Say: It will perhaps
            be soon; </div>(52) 
         <div lang="ar">يَوْمَ يَدْعُوكُمْ فَتَسْتَجِيبُونَ بِحَمْدِهِ وَتَظُنُّونَ إِنْ لَبِثْتُمْ
            إِلَّا قَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> It will be on a Day when He will call you, and ye will answer (His call) with
            (words of) His praise, and ye will think that ye tarried but a little
            while<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> A day when He will call you and ye will answer with His praise, and ye will
            think that ye have tarried but a little while. </div>(53) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقُلْ لِعِبَادِي يَقُولُوا الَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ ۚ <span class="anaphora">إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ يَنْزَغُ بَيْنَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ
               الشَّيْطَانَ</span> كَانَ لِلْإِنْسَانِ عَدُوًّا مُبِينًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say to My servants that they should (only) say those things that are best:
            <span class="anaphora">for Satan doth sow dissensions among them: For Satan
               is to man an avowed enemy.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Tell My bondmen to speak that which is kindlier. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> the devil
            soweth discord among them. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> the devil is for man an open foe. </div>(54) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">رَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِكُمْ ۖ إِنْ يَشَأْ
               يَرْحَمْكُمْ أَوْ إِنْ يَشَأْ يُعَذِّبْكُمْ ۚ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ
               وَكِيلًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> It is your Lord that knoweth you best: <span class="parallelism">If He
               please, He granteth you mercy, or if He please, punishment:</span> We have not
            sent thee to be a disposer of their affairs for them.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Your Lord is Best Aware of you. If He will, He will have mercy on you, or if
            He will, He will punish you. We have not sent thee (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>) as a warden over them. </div>(55) 
         <div lang="ar">وَرَبُّكَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۗ وَلَقَدْ فَضَّلْنَا
            بَعْضَ النَّبِيِّينَ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ ۖ وَآتَيْنَا <span class="name">دَاوُودَ</span> زَبُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And it is your Lord that knoweth best all beings that are in the heavens and
            on earth: We did bestow on some prophets more (and other) gifts than on others:
            <span class="allusion">and We gave to David (the gift of) the Psalms.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And thy Lord is Best Aware of all who are in the heavens and the earth. And we
            preferred some of the prophets above others, and unto <span class="name">David</span> We gave the
            Psalms. </div>(56) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلِ ادْعُوا الَّذِينَ زَعَمْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ فَلَا يَمْلِكُونَ كَشْفَ
            الضُّرِّ عَنْكُمْ وَلَا تَحْوِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "Call on those - besides Him - whom ye fancy: they have neither the power
            to remove your troubles from you nor to change them."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: Cry unto those (saints and angels) whom ye assume (to be gods) beside
            Him, yet they have no power to rid you of misfortune nor to change. </div>(57) 
         <div lang="ar">أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ يَبْتَغُونَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمُ الْوَسِيلَةَ
            أَيُّهُمْ أَقْرَبُ وَيَرْجُونَ رَحْمَتَهُ وَيَخَافُونَ عَذَابَهُ ۚ إِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّكَ
            كَانَ مَحْذُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those whom they call upon do desire (for themselves) means of access to their
            Lord, - even those who are nearest: they hope for His Mercy and fear His Wrath: for
            the
            Wrath of thy Lord is something to take heed of.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those unto whom they cry seek the way of approach to their Lord, which of them
            shall be the nearest; they hope for His mercy and they fear His doom. <span class="emph">Lo!</span>
            the doom of thy Lord is to be shunned. </div>(58) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِنْ مِنْ قَرْيَةٍ إِلَّا نَحْنُ مُهْلِكُوهَا قَبْلَ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ أَوْ
            مُعَذِّبُوهَا عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا ۚ كَانَ ذَٰلِكَ فِي الْكِتَابِ مَسْطُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> There is not a population but We shall destroy it before the Day of Judgment
            or punish it with a dreadful Penalty: that is written in the (eternal) Record.</div>
         <div lang="en"> There is not a township but We shall destroy it ere the Day of Resurrection,
            or <span class="anaphora">punish it with dire punishment</span>. That is
            set forth in the Book (of Our decrees). </div>(59) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="allusion">وَمَا مَنَعَنَا أَنْ نُرْسِلَ بِالْآيَاتِ إِلَّا أَنْ كَذَّبَ بِهَا
               الْأَوَّلُونَ ۚ وَآتَيْنَا <span class="name">ثَمُودَ النَّاقَةَ</span></span> مُبْصِرَةً
            فَظَلَمُوا بِهَا ۚ وَمَا نُرْسِلُ بِالْآيَاتِ إِلَّا تَخْوِيفًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We refrain from sending the signs, only because the men of former
            generations treated them as false: We sent the she-camel to the Thamud to open their
            eyes, but they treated her wrongfully: We only send the Signs by way of terror(and
            warning from evil).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Naught hindereth Us from sending portents save that the folk of old denied
            them. And <span class="allusion">We gave Thamud the she-camel</span> - a clear portent save to
            warn. </div>(60) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لَكَ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ أَحَاطَ بِالنَّاسِ ۚ وَمَا جَعَلْنَا
            الرُّؤْيَا الَّتِي أَرَيْنَاكَ إِلَّا فِتْنَةً لِلنَّاسِ وَ<span class="allusion">الشَّجَرَةَ
               الْمَلْعُونَةَ</span> فِي الْقُرْآنِ ۚ وَنُخَوِّفُهُمْ فَمَا يَزِيدُهُمْ إِلَّا
            طُغْيَانًا كَبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Behold<span class="emph">!</span>We told thee that thy Lord doth encompass mankind round
            about: We granted the vision which We showed thee, but as a trial for men,- as also
            the
            Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Qur'an: We put terror (and warning) into them, but
            it
            only increases their inordinate transgression<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And (it was a warning) when we told thee:<span class="emph"> Lo!</span> thy Lord
            encompasseth mankind, and We appointed the sight which We showed thee as an ordeal
            for
            mankind, and (likewise) the<span class="allusion"> Accursed Tree in the Qur'an</span>. We warn
            them, but it increaseth them in naught save gross impiety. </div>(61) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا <span class="name">لِآدَمَ</span> فَسَجَدُوا إِلَّا
            <span class="name">إِبْلِيسَ</span> قَالَ أَأَسْجُدُ لِمَنْ خَلَقْتَ طِينًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="imagery">Behold<span class="emph">!</span>We said to the angels: "Bow down unto
               <span class="name">Adam</span></span>": They bowed down except Iblis: He said,
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"Shall I bow down to one whom Thou didst create from
               clay?"</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And when We said unto the angels: Fall down prostrate before <span class="name">Adam</span>
            and they fell prostrate all save <span class="name">Iblis</span>, he said: Shall I fall prostrate
            before that which Thou hast created of clay? </div>(62) 
         <div lang="ar">قَالَ أَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ إِلَىٰ
            يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَأَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> He said: "Seest Thou? this is the one whom Thou hast honoured above
            me<span class="emph">!</span>If Thou wilt but respite me to the Day of Judgment, I will surely
            bring his descendants under my sway - all but a few<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> He said: Seest Thou this (creature) whom Thou hast honoured above me, if Thou
            give me grace until the Day of Resurrection I verily will seize his seed, save but
            a
            few. </div>(63) 
         <div lang="ar">قَالَ اذْهَبْ فَمَنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ جَزَاؤُكُمْ جَزَاءً
            مَوْفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> (Allah) said: "Go thy way; if any of them follow thee, <span class="emph">verily</span>
            Hell will be the recompense of you (all)- an ample recompense.</div>
         <div lang="en"> He said: Go, and whosoever of them followeth thee - <span class="emph">lo!</span> hell will
            be your payment, ample payment. </div>(64) 
         <div lang="ar">وَاسْتَفْزِزْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ مِنْهُمْ بِصَوْتِكَ وَأَجْلِبْ عَلَيْهِمْ
            بِخَيْلِكَ وَرَجِلِكَ وَشَارِكْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَوْلَادِ وَعِدْهُمْ ۚ وَمَا
            يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ إِلَّا غُرُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> "Lead to destruction those whom thou canst among them, &gt;with thy (seductive)
            voice; make assaults on them with thy cavalry and thy infantry; mutually share with
            them
            wealth and children; and make promises to them." But Satan promises them nothing but
            deceit.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And excite any of them whom thou canst with thy voice, and urge thy horse and
            foot against them, and be a partner in their wealth and children, and promise them.
            Satan promiseth them only to deceive. </div>(65) 
         <div lang="ar">إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ ۚ وَكَفَىٰ بِرَبِّكَ
            وَكِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> "As for My servants, no authority shalt thou have over them:" Enough is thy
            Lord for a Disposer of affairs.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span> My (faithful) bondmen - over them thou hast no power, and thy Lord
            sufficeth as (their) guardian. </div>(66) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">رَبُّكُمُ الَّذِي يُزْجِي لَكُمُ الْفُلْكَ فِي الْبَحْرِ
               لِتَبْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِهِ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيمًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Your Lord is He That maketh the Ship go smoothly for you through the sea, in
            order that ye may seek of his Bounty. For he is unto you most Merciful.</div>
         <div lang="en"> (<span class="emph">O</span> mankind), <span class="imagery">your Lord is He Who driveth for you the
               ship upon the sea that ye may seek of His bounty.</span>
            <span class="emph">Lo!</span> He was ever Merciful toward you. </div>(67) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَنْ تَدْعُونَ
               إِلَّا إِيَّاهُ ۖ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ ۚ وَكَانَ
               الْإِنْسَانُ كَفُورًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony">When distress seizes you at sea, those that ye call upon - besides Himself -
               leave you in the lurch<span class="emph">!</span>but when He brings you back safe to land, ye
               turn away (from Him).</span> Most ungrateful is man<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="imagery">And when harm toucheth you upon the sea, all unto whom ye cry (for succour)
               fail save Him (alone), but when He bringeth you safe to land, ye turn
               away,</span> for man was ever thankless. </div>(68) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَفَأَمِنْتُمْ أَنْ يَخْسِفَ بِكُمْ جَانِبَ الْبَرِّ أَوْ
               يُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِبًا ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ وَكِيلًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Do ye then feel secure that He will not cause you to be swallowed up
               beneath the earth when ye are on land, or that He will not send against you a
               <span class="imagery">violent tornado (with showers of stones)</span> so that ye shall
               find no one to carry out your affairs for you?</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Feel ye then secure that He will not cause <span class="imagery">a slope of the
                  land to engulf you</span>, or send a sand-storm upon you, and then ye will
               find that ye have no protector?</span>
            </div>(69) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَمْ أَمِنْتُمْ أَنْ يُعِيدَكُمْ فِيهِ تَارَةً أُخْرَىٰ
               فَيُرْسِلَ عَلَيْكُمْ قَاصِفًا مِنَ الرِّيحِ فَيُغْرِقَكُمْ بِمَا كَفَرْتُمْ ۙ ثُمَّ
               لَا تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا بِهِ تَبِيعًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Or do ye feel secure</span> that He will not send you
            back a second time to sea and send against you a heavy gale to drown you because of
            your
            ingratitude, so that ye find no helper. Therein against Us?</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Or feel ye secure that He will not return you to that (plight) a
               second time, and send against you a <span class="imagery">hurricane of wind</span> and drown
               you for your thanklessness, and then ye will not find therein that ye have any
               avenger against Us?</span>
            </div>(70) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا <span class="name">بَنِي آدَمَ</span> وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
            وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنْ
            خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> We have honoured the sons of <span class="name">Adam</span>; provided them with transport
            on land and sea; given them for sustenance things good and pure; and conferred on
            them
            special favours, above a great part of our creation.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Verily we have honoured the Children of Adam. We carry them on the land and
            the sea, and have made provision of good things for them, and <span class="anaphora">have preferred them above many of those whom We created with a
               marked preferment</span>. </div>(71) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="simile">يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ ۖ فَمَنْ
               أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلَا يُظْلَمُونَ
               فَتِيلًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> One day We shall call together all human beings with their (respective) Imams:
            those who are given their record in their right hand will read it (with pleasure),
            and
            they will not be dealt with unjustly in the least.</div>
         <div lang="en"> On the day when We shall summon all men with their record, whoso is given his
            book in his right hand - such will read their book and they will not be wronged a
            shred. </div>(72) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">وَمَنْ كَانَ فِي هَٰذِهِ أَعْمَىٰ فَهُوَ فِي
               الْآخِرَةِ أَعْمَىٰ وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">But those who were blind in this world, will be blind
               in the hereafter,</span> and most astray from the Path.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">Whoso is blind here will be blind in the
               Hereafter</span>, and yet further from the road. </div>(73) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِنْ كَادُوا لَيَفْتِنُونَكَ عَنِ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ لِتَفْتَرِيَ
            عَلَيْنَا غَيْرَهُ ۖ وَإِذًا لَاتَّخَذُوكَ خَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And their purpose was to tempt thee away from that which We had revealed unto
            thee, to substitute in our name something quite different; (in that case),
            behold<span class="emph">!</span>they would certainly have made thee (their)
            friend<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And they indeed strove hard to beguile thee (<span class="name">Muhammad</span>) away from
            that wherewith We have inspired thee, that thou shouldst invent other than it against
            Us; and then would they have accepted thee as a friend. </div>(74) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَوْلَا أَنْ ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدْتَ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ شَيْئًا
            قَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And had We not given thee strength, thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them
            a little.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">And if We had not made thee wholly firm thou mightest almost have
               inclined unto them a little.</span>
            </div>(75) 
         <div lang="ar">إِذًا لَأَذَقْنَاكَ<span class="anaphora"> ضِعْفَ الْحَيَاةِ وَضِعْفَ
               الْمَمَاتِ</span> ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُ لَكَ عَلَيْنَا نَصِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> In that case We should have made thee taste <span class="anaphora">an
               equal portion (of punishment) in this life, and an equal portion in
               death</span>: and moreover thou wouldst have found none to help thee against
            Us<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Then had we made thee taste <span class="anaphora">a double
               (punishment) of living and a double (punishment) of dying</span>, then hadst
            thou found no helper against Us. </div>(76) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِنْ كَادُوا لَيَسْتَفِزُّونَكَ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ لِيُخْرِجُوكَ مِنْهَا ۖ
            وَإِذًا لَا يَلْبَثُونَ خِلَافَكَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Their purpose was to scare thee off the land, in order to expel thee; but in
            that case they would not have stayed (therein) after thee, except for a little
            while.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And they indeed wished to scare thee from the land that they might drive thee
            forth from thence, and then they would have stayed (there) but a little after thee.
            </div>(77) 
         <div lang="ar">سُنَّةَ مَنْ قَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِنْ رُسُلِنَا ۖ وَلَا تَجِدُ
            لِسُنَّتِنَا تَحْوِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> (This was Our) way with the messengers We sent before thee: thou wilt find no
            change in Our ways.</div>
         <div lang="en"> (Such was Our) method in the case of those whom We sent before thee (to
            mankind), and thou wilt not find for Our method aught of power to change. </div>(78) 
         <div lang="ar">أَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ لِدُلُوكِ الشَّمْسِ إِلَىٰ غَسَقِ اللَّيْلِ وَقُرْآنَ
            الْفَجْرِ ۖ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُودًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Establish regular prayers - at the sun's decline till the darkness of the
            night, and the morning prayer and reading: for the prayer and reading in the morning
            carry their testimony.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Establish worship at the going down of the sun until the dark of night, and
            (the recital of) the Qur'an at dawn. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> (the recital of) the Qur'an at
            dawn is ever witnessed. </div>(79) 
         <div lang="ar">وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَكَ عَسَىٰ أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ
            مَقَامًا مَحْمُودًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And pray in the small watches of the morning: (it would be) an additional
            prayer (or spiritual profit) for thee: soon will thy Lord raise thee to a Station
            of
            Praise and Glory<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And some part of the night awake for it, a largess for thee. It may be that
            thy Lord will raise thee to a praised estate. </div>(80) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقُلْ رَبِّ أَدْخِلْنِي مُدْخَلَ صِدْقٍ وَأَخْرِجْنِي مُخْرَجَ صِدْقٍ
            وَاجْعَلْ لِي مِنْ لَدُنْكَ سُلْطَانًا نَصِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">Say: "<span class="emph">O</span> my Lord<span class="emph">!</span>Let my entry
               be by the Gate of Truth and Honour, and likewise my exit by the Gate of Truth and
               Honour; and grant me from Thy Presence an authority to aid
               (me)."</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And say: My Lord<span class="emph">!</span> Cause me <span class="parallelism">to
               come in with a firm incoming and to go out with a firm outgoing</span>. And
            give me from Thy presence a sustaining Power. </div>(81) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="anaphora">وَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ ۚ إِنَّ
               الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ زَهُوقًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And say: "Truth has (now) arrived, and Falsehood perished: for Falsehood is
            (by its nature) bound to perish."</div>
         <div lang="en"> And say: <span class="parallelism">Truth hath come and falsehood hath
               vanished</span> away. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> falsehood is ever bound to vanish. </div>(82) 
         <div lang="ar">وَنُنَزِّلُ مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ۙ وَلَا
            يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا خَسَارًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> We send down (stage by stage) in the Qur'an that which is a healing and a
            mercy to those who believe: to the unjust it causes nothing but <span class="anaphora">loss after loss</span>.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We reveal of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy for believers
            though it increase the evil-doers in naught save ruin. </div>(83) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَى الْإِنْسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأَىٰ بِجَانِبِهِ ۖ وَإِذَا
            مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ كَانَ يَئُوسًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony">Yet when We bestow Our favours on man, he turns away and becomes remote on his
               side (instead of coming to Us)</span>, and when evil seizes him he gives himself up
            to despair<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And when We make life pleasant unto man, he turneth away and is averse; and
            when ill toucheth him he is in despair. </div>(84) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ كُلٌّ يَعْمَلُ عَلَىٰ شَاكِلَتِهِ فَرَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ هُوَ
            أَهْدَىٰ سَبِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "Everyone acts according to his own disposition: But your Lord knows best
            who it is that is best guided on the Way."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: Each one doth according to his rule of conduct, and thy Lord is Best
            Aware of him whose way is right. </div>(85) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الرُّوحِ ۖ قُلِ الرُّوحُ مِنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّي وَمَا
            أُوتِيتُمْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> They ask thee concerning the Spirit (of inspiration). Say: "The Spirit
            (cometh) by command of my Lord: of knowledge it is only a little that is communicated
            to
            you, (<span class="emph">O men!</span>)"</div>
         <div lang="en"> They are asking thee concerning the Spirit. Say: The Spirit is by command of
            my Lord, and of knowledge ye have been vouchsafed but little. </div>(86) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَئِنْ شِئْنَا لَنَذْهَبَنَّ بِالَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ ثُمَّ لَا تَجِدُ
            لَكَ بِهِ عَلَيْنَا وَكِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> If it were Our Will, We could take away that which We have sent thee by
            inspiration:then wouldst thou find none to plead thy affair in that matter as against
            Us,-</div>
         <div lang="en"> And if We willed We could withdraw that which We have revealed unto thee, then
            wouldst thou find no guardian for thee against Us in respect thereof. </div>(87) 
         <div lang="ar">إِلَّا رَحْمَةً مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۚ إِنَّ فَضْلَهُ كَانَ عَلَيْكَ كَبِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Except for Mercy from thy Lord: for his bounty is to thee (indeed)
            great.</div>
         <div lang="en"> (It is naught) save mercy from thy Lord. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> His kindness unto
            thee was ever great. </div>(88) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ لَئِنِ اجْتَمَعَتِ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَأْتُوا بِمِثْلِ
            هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ لَا يَأْتُونَ بِمِثْلِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَ بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ
            ظَهِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "If the whole of mankind and Jinns were to gather together to produce the
            like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof, even if they backed
            up
            each other with help and support.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: <span class="emph">Verily</span>, though mankind and the jinn should assemble to
            produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like thereof though they
            were helpers one of another. </div>(89) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدْ صَرَّفْنَا لِلنَّاسِ فِي هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنِ مِنْ كُلِّ مَثَلٍ فَأَبَىٰ
            أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ إِلَّا كُفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony">And We have explained to man, in this Qur'an, every kind of similitude: yet the
               greater part of men refuse (to receive it) except with
               ingratitude<span class="emph">!</span></span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="emph">verily</span> We have displayed for mankind in this Qur'an all kind
            of similitudes, but most of mankind refuse aught save disbelief. </div>(90) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَقَالُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّىٰ تَفْجُرَ لَنَا مِنَ
               الْأَرْضِ يَنْبُوعًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> They say: <span class="imagery">We shall not believe in thee, until thou cause a spring to
               gush forth for us from the earth,</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And they say: We will not put faith in thee till thou <span class="imagery">cause a spring
               to gush forth from the earth for us</span>; </div>(91) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَوْ تَكُونَ لَكَ جَنَّةٌ مِنْ نَخِيلٍ وَعِنَبٍ فَتُفَجِّرَ
               الْأَنْهَارَ خِلَالَهَا تَفْجِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="imagery">Or (until) thou have a garden of date trees and vines, and cause rivers to gush
               forth in their midst, carrying abundant water;</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Or thou have a <span class="imagery">garden of date-palms and grapes</span>, and
            <span class="imagery">cause rivers to gush forth therein abundantly;</span>
            </div>(92) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَوْ تُسْقِطَ السَّمَاءَ كَمَا زَعَمْتَ عَلَيْنَا كِسَفًا أَوْ
               تَأْتِيَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةِ قَبِيلًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> "Or thou cause the sky to fall in pieces, as thou sayest (will happen),
            against us; or thou bring Allah and the angels before (us) face to face:</div>
         <div lang="en"> Or thou cause <span class="imagery">the heaven to fall upon us piecemeal</span>, as thou
            hast pretended, or bring Allah and the angels as a warrant; </div>(93) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَوْ يَكُونَ لَكَ بَيْتٌ مِنْ زُخْرُفٍ أَوْ تَرْقَىٰ فِي
               السَّمَاءِ وَلَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لِرُقِيِّكَ حَتَّىٰ تُنَزِّلَ عَلَيْنَا كِتَابًا
               نَقْرَؤُهُ ۗ قُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّي هَلْ كُنْتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا
               رَسُولًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="imagery">"Or thou have a house adorned with gold, or thou mount a ladder right into the
               skies.</span> No, we shall not even believe in thy mounting until thou send down
            to us a book that we could read." Say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"Glory to my
               Lord<span class="emph">!</span>Am I aught but a man,- a
               messenger?"</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Or thou have a <span class="imagery">house of gold</span>; or thou ascend up into
            heaven, and even then we will put no faith in thine ascension till thou bring down
            for
            us a book that we can read. Say (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>): My Lord be Glorified<span class="emph">!</span> Am I aught save a mortal
            messenger? </div>(94) 
         <div lang="ar">وَمَا مَنَعَ النَّاسَ أَنْ يُؤْمِنُوا إِذْ جَاءَهُمُ الْهُدَىٰ إِلَّا أَنْ
            قَالُوا أَبَعَثَ اللَّهُ بَشَرًا رَسُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> What kept men back from belief when Guidance came to them, was nothing but
            this: they said, "Has Allah sent a man (like us) to be (His) Messenger?"</div>
         <div lang="en"> And naught prevented mankind from believing when the guidance came unto them
            save that they said: Hath Allah sent a mortal as (His) messenger? </div>(95) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ لَوْ كَانَ فِي الْأَرْضِ مَلَائِكَةٌ يَمْشُونَ مُطْمَئِنِّينَ لَنَزَّلْنَا
            عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَلَكًا رَسُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say, "If there were settled, on earth, angels walking about in peace and
            quiet, We should certainly have sent them down from the heavens an angel for a
            messenger."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: If there were in the earth angels walking secure, We had sent down for
            them from heaven an angel as messenger. </div>(96) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ كَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ
            <span class="amplification">خَبِيرًا</span>
            <span class="amplification">بَصِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you: for He is well
            acquainted with His servants, and He sees (all things).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: Allah sufficeth for a witness between me and you. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> He is
            <span class="amplification">Knower</span>, <span class="amplification">Seer</span> of His
            slaves. </div>(97) 
         <div lang="ar">وَمَنْ يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَهُوَ الْمُهْتَدِ ۖ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلْ فَلَنْ تَجِدَ لَهُمْ
            أَوْلِيَاءَ مِنْ دُونِهِ ۖ وَنَحْشُرُهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ <span class="motif">عَلَىٰ وُجُوهِهِم</span>
            <span class="motif">عُمْيًا وَبُكْمًا وَصُمًّا</span> ۖ مَأْوَاهُمْ
            جَهَنَّمُ ۖ كُلَّمَا خَبَتْ زِدْنَاهُمْ سَعِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> It is he whom Allah guides, that is on true Guidance; but he whom He leaves
            astray - for such wilt thou find no protector besides Him. On the Day of Judgment
            We
            shall gather, them together, prone on their faces, blind, dumb, and deaf: their abode
            will be Hell: every time it shows abatement, We shall increase from them the fierceness
            of the Fire.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And he whom Allah guideth, he is led aright; while, as for him whom He sendeth
            astray, for them thou wilt find no protecting friends beside Him, and We shall assemble
            them on the Day of Resurrection <span class="motif">on their
               faces</span>,<span class="motif"> blind, dumb and deaf</span>;
            their habitation will be hell; whenever it abateth, We increase the flame for them.
            </div>(98) 
         <div lang="ar">ذَٰلِكَ جَزَاؤُهُمْ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِنَا وَقَالُوا أَإِذَا كُنَّا
            عِظَامًا وَرُفَاتًا أَإِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ خَلْقًا جَدِيدًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> That is their recompense, because they rejected Our signs, and said, "When we
            are <span class="metaphor">reduced to bones and broken dust</span>, should
            we really be raised up (to be) a new Creation?"</div>
         <div lang="en"> That is their reward because they disbelieved Our revelations and said:
            <span class="metaphor">When we are bones and fragments </span>shall we,
            forsooth, be raised up as a new creation? </div>(99) 
         <div lang="ar">أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ قَادِرٌ
            عَلَىٰ أَنْ يَخْلُقَ مِثْلَهُمْ وَجَعَلَ لَهُمْ أَجَلًا لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ فَأَبَى
            الظَّالِمُونَ إِلَّا كُفُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, has power to
            create the like of them (anew)? Only He has decreed a term appointed, of which there
            is
            no doubt. But the unjust refuse (to receive it) except with ingratitude.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Have they not seen that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth is Able to
            create the like of them, and hath appointed for them an end whereof there is no doubt?
            But the wrong-doers refuse aught save disbelief. </div>(100) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ لَوْ أَنْتُمْ تَمْلِكُونَ خَزَائِنَ رَحْمَةِ رَبِّي إِذًا لَأَمْسَكْتُمْ
            خَشْيَةَ الْإِنْفَاقِ ۚ وَكَانَ الْإِنْسَانُ قَتُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "If ye had control of the Treasures of the Mercy of my Lord, behold, ye
            would keep them back, for fear of spending them: for man is (every)
            niggardly<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say (unto them): If ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, ye
            would surely hold them back for fear of spending, for man was ever grudging. </div>(101) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا <span class="name">مُوسَىٰ</span>
            <span class="allusion">تِسْعَ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ</span> ۖ فَاسْأَلْ <span class="name">بَنِي
               إِسْرَائِيلَ</span> إِذْ جَاءَهُمْ فَقَالَ لَهُ فِرْعَوْنُ إِنِّي لَأَظُنُّكَ يَا
            <span class="name">مُوسَىٰ</span> مَسْحُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> To <span class="name">Moses</span> We did give Nine Clear Signs: As <span class="name">the Children of
               Israel</span>: when he came to them, <span class="name">Pharaoh</span> said to him:
            "<span class="emph">O</span> Moses<span class="emph">!</span>I consider thee, <span class="emph">indeed</span>, to have
            been worked upon by sorcery<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="emph">verily</span> We gave unto <span class="name">Moses</span>
            <span class="allusion">nine tokens</span>, clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty). Do but ask the
            <span class="name">Children of Israel</span> how he came unto them, then <span class="name">Pharaoh</span>
            said unto him: <span class="emph">Lo!</span> I deem thee one bewitched, O <span class="name">Moses</span>. </div>(102) 
         <div lang="ar">قَالَ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا أَنْزَلَ هَٰؤُلَاءِ إِلَّا رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ
            وَالْأَرْضِ بَصَائِرَ وَإِنِّي لَأَظُنُّكَ يَا <span class="name">فِرْعَوْنُ</span> مَثْبُورًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="name">Moses</span> said, "Thou knowest well that these things have been sent down by
            none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-opening evidence: and I consider
            thee <span class="emph">indeed</span>, <span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Pharaoh</span>, to be one doomed to destruction<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> He said: In truth thou knowest that none sent down these (portents) save the
            Lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs, and <span class="emph">lo!</span> (for my part) I deem
            thee lost, <span class="emph">O</span> Pharaoh. </div>(103) 
         <div lang="ar">فَأَرَادَ أَنْ يَسْتَفِزَّهُمْ مِنَ الْأَرْضِ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَعَهُ
            جَمِيعًا</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="irony"> So he resolved to remove them from the face of the earth: but We did drown him
               and all who were with him.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And he wished to scare them from the land, but We drowned him and those with
            him, all together. </div>(104) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقُلْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ <span class="name">لِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ</span> اسْكُنُوا الْأَرْضَ
            فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ الْآخِرَةِ جِئْنَا بِكُمْ لَفِيفًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We said thereafter to the <span class="name">Children of Israel</span>, "Dwell
            securely in the land (of promise)": but when the second of the warnings came to pass,
            We
            gathered you together in a mingled crowd.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And We said unto the <span class="name">Children of Israel</span> after him: Dwell in the
            land; but when the promise of the Hereafter cometh to pass We shall bring you as a
            crowd
            gathered out of various nations. </div>(105) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="anaphora">وَبِالْحَقِّ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ وَبِالْحَقِّ
               نَزَلَ</span> ۗ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلَّا مُبَشِّرًا وَنَذِيرًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> We sent down the (Qur'an) <span class="anaphora">in Truth, and in
               Truth</span> has it descended: and We sent thee but to give Glad Tidings and
            to warn (sinners).</div>
         <div lang="en"> With truth have We sent it down, and with truth hath it descended. And We
            have sent thee as naught else save a bearer of good tidings and a warner. </div>(106) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقُرْآنًا فَرَقْنَاهُ لِتَقْرَأَهُ عَلَى النَّاسِ عَلَىٰ مُكْثٍ
            وَنَزَّلْنَاهُ تَنْزِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> (It is) a Qur'an which We have divided (into parts from time to time), in
            order that thou mightest recite it to men at intervals: We have revealed it by
            stages.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And (it is) a Qur'an that We have divided, that thou mayst recite it unto
            mankind at intervals, and We have revealed it by (successive) revelation. </div>(107) 
         <div lang="ar">قُلْ آمِنُوا بِهِ أَوْ لَا تُؤْمِنُوا ۚ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ مِنْ
            قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ <span class="motif">يَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ
               سُجَّدًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: "Whether ye believe in it or not, it is true that those who were given
            knowledge beforehand, when it is recited to them, <span class="motif">fall down
               on their faces in humble prostration,</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: Believe therein or believe not, <span class="emph">lo!</span> those who were given
            knowledge before it, when it is read unto them, fall down prostrate <span class="motif">on their faces</span>, adoring, </div>(108) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِنْ كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّنَا لَمَفْعُولًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> "And they say: 'Glory to our Lord<span class="emph">!</span>Truly has the promise of our
            Lord been fulfilled<span class="emph">!</span>'"</div>
         <div lang="en"> Saying: Glory to our Lord<span class="emph">!</span>
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> the promise of our Lord must be fulfilled. </div>(109) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="motif">وَيَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ يَبْكُونَ</span>
            وَيَزِيدُهُمْ خُشُوعًا ۩</div>
         <div lang="en"> They <span class="motif">fall down on their faces in
               tears,</span> and it increases their (earnest) humility.</div>
         <div lang="en"> They fall down <span class="motif">on their faces</span>,
            weeping, and it increaseth humility in them. </div>(110) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">قُلِ ادْعُوا اللَّهَ أَوِ ادْعُوا الرَّحْمَٰنَ ۖ أَيًّا مَا
               تَدْعُوا فَلَهُ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ</span> ۚ وَلَا تَجْهَرْ
            بِصَلَاتِكَ وَلَا تُخَافِتْ بِهَا وَابْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ سَبِيلًا</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say: <span class="amplification">"Call upon Allah, or call upon Rahman: by whatever name
               ye call upon Him, (it is well): for to Him belong the Most Beautiful
               Names.</span> Neither speak thy Prayer aloud, nor speak it in a low tone,
            but seek a middle course between."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say (unto mankind): Cry unto Allah, or cry unto <span class="amplification">the
               Beneficent</span>, unto whichsoever ye cry (it is the same). His are the
            most beautiful names. And thou (<span class="name">Muhammad</span>), be not loud-voiced in thy
            worship nor yet silent therein, but follow a way between. </div>(111) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">وَقُلِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَدًا وَلَمْ
               يَكُنْ لَهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ وَلِيٌّ مِنَ الذُّلِّ ۖ
               وَكَبِّرْهُ تَكْبِيرًا</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="amplification">Say: Praise be to Allah, who begets no son, and has no partner in (His)
               dominion: Nor (needs) He any to protect Him from humiliation: yea, magnify Him for
               His greatness and glory<span class="emph">!</span>"</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And say: <span class="amplification">Praise be to Allah</span>, Who hath not
            taken unto Himself a son, and Who hath no partner in the Sovereignty, nor hath He
            any
            protecting friend through dependence. And <span class="anaphora">magnify Him with
               all magnificence.</span>
            </div>
      </main>
   </body>
</html>