<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="readingview.css"/><script type="application/javascript" src="readingview.js"></script><title>Surah13</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="checkbox-container"><label class="amplification"><input type="checkbox" id="amplification"/>Amplification</label><label class="emph"><input type="checkbox" id="emph"/>Emphasis</label><label class="irony"><input type="checkbox" id="irony"/>Irony</label><label class="imagery"><input type="checkbox" id="imagery"/>Imagery</label><label class="allusion"><input type="checkbox" id="allusion"/>Allusion</label><label class="contrast"><input type="checkbox" id="contrast"/>Contrast</label><label class="name"><input type="checkbox" id="name"/>Name</label><label class="place"><input type="checkbox" id="place"/>Place</label><label class="rhetoricalQuestion"><input type="checkbox" id="rhetoricalQuestion"/>Rhetorical Question</label><label class="motif"><input type="checkbox" id="motif"/>Motif</label><label class="anaphora"><input type="checkbox" id="anaphora"/>Anaphora</label><label class="parallelism"><input type="checkbox" id="parallelism"/>Parallelism</label><label class="metaphor"><input type="checkbox" id="metaphor"/>Metaphor</label><label class="simile"><input type="checkbox" id="simile"/>Simile</label></div>
      <section>
         <h2>Arabic</h2>
         <h2>Ali</h2>
         <h2>Pickthall</h2>
      </section>
      <main>(1) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">بِسْمِ اللَّهِ</span>
            <span class="amplification">الرَّحْمَٰنِ</span>
            <span class="amplification">الرَّحِيمِ</span> المر ۚ تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ ۗ وَالَّذِي
            أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ الْحَقُّ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا
            يُؤْمِنُونَ</div>
         <div lang="en">A.L.M.R. These are the signs (or verses) of the Book: that which hath been
            revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the <span class="motif">Truth</span>;
            but most men believe not.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are verses of the Scripture. That which is revealed
            unto thee from thy Lord is the Truth, but most of mankind believe not. </div>(2) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">اللَّهُ الَّذِي رَفَعَ السَّمَاوَاتِ بِغَيْرِ عَمَدٍ تَرَوْنَهَا ۖ
               ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ ۖ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ ۖ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي
               لِأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى ۚ يُدَبِّرُ الْأَمْرَ يُفَصِّلُ الْآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ بِلِقَاءِ
               رَبِّكُمْ تُوقِنُونَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Allah <span class="anaphora">is He Who</span> raised the heavens
            without any pillars that ye can see; is firmly established on the throne (of authority);
            He has subjected the sun and the moon (to his Law)<span class="emph">!</span> Each one runs (its
            course) for a term appointed. He doth regulate all affairs, explaining the signs in
            detail, that ye may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Allah it is Who raised up the heavens without visible supports, then mounted
            the Throne, and <span class="imagery">compelled the sun and the moon to be of service, each runneth
               unto an appointed term </span>; He ordereth the course; He detaileth the
            revelations, that haply ye may be certain of the meeting with your Lord. </div>(3) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَهُوَ الَّذِي مَدَّ الْأَرْضَ وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنْهَارًا ۖ
               وَمِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ جَعَلَ فِيهَا زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ ۖ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
               النَّهَارَ ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="imagery">And it <span class="anaphora">is He who</span> spread out
               the earth, and set thereon mountains standing firm and (flowing) rivers: and fruit
               of every kind He made in pairs, two and two: He draweth the night as a veil o'er the
               Day.</span> Behold, <span class="emph">verily</span> in these things there are signs for those
            who consider<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And He it is Who <span class="imagery">spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills
               and flowing streams, and of all fruits He placed therein two spouses (male and
               female)</span>. He covereth the night with the day. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> herein
            verily are portents for people who take thought. </div>(4) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَفِي الْأَرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُتَجَاوِرَاتٌ وَجَنَّاتٌ مِنْ أَعْنَابٍ
               وَزَرْعٌ وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَىٰ بِمَاءٍ وَاحِدٍ وَنُفَضِّلُ
               بَعْضَهَا عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ فِي الْأُكُلِ ۚ إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ
               يَعْقِلُونَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="imagery">And in the earth are tracts (diverse though) neighbouring, and gardens
               of vines and fields sown with corn, and palm trees - growing out of single roots or
               otherwise: watered with the same water,</span> yet some of them We make more
            excellent than others to eat. Behold, <span class="emph">verily</span> in these things there are
            signs for those who understand<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="imagery">in the Earth are neighbouring tracts, vineyards and ploughed
               lands, and date-palms, like and unlike, which are <span class="anaphora">watered with one water</span></span>. And we have made some of them to
            excel others in fruit. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> herein <span class="emph">verily</span> are portents for
            people who have sense. </div>(5) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="anaphora">وَإِنْ تَعْجَبْ فَعَجَبٌ</span>
            قَوْلُهُمْ <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">أَإِذَا كُنَّا تُرَابًا أَإِنَّا لَفِي خَلْقٍ
               جَدِيدٍ</span> ۗ أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ ۖ
            وَأُولَٰئِكَ الْأَغْلَالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ ۖ وَأُولَٰئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ ۖ هُمْ
            فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ</div>
         <div lang="en">If thou dost marvel (at their want of faith), strange is their saying: "When we
            are (actually) dust, shall we <span class="emph">indeed</span> then be in a creation renewed?" They
            are those who deny their Lord<span class="emph">!</span> They are those round whose necks will be
            yokes (of servitude): they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for
            aye)<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="anaphora">And if thou wonderest, then wondrous is their
               saying</span>: When <span class="metaphor">we are dust</span>,
            are we then forsooth (to be raised) in a new creation? Such are they who disbelieve
            in
            their Lord; <span class="imagery">such have carcans on their necks</span>; such are rightful
            owners of the Fire, they will abide therein. </div>(6) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ قَبْلَ الْحَسَنَةِ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ
            قَبْلِهِمُ الْمَثُلَاتُ ۗ <span class="amplification">وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَذُو مَغْفِرَةٍ لِلنَّاسِ
               عَلَىٰ ظُلْمِهِمْ ۖ وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَشَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">They ask thee to hasten on the evil in preference to the good: Yet have come to
            pass, before them, (many) exemplary punishments<span class="emph">!</span>
            <span class="parallelism">But <span class="emph">verily</span> thy Lord is full of forgiveness
               for mankind for their wrong-doing, and <span class="emph">verily</span> thy Lord is (also) strict
               in punishment.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And they bid thee hasten on the evil rather than the good, when exemplary
            punishments have indeed occurred before them. But <span class="emph">lo!</span>
            <span class="parallelism">thy Lord is rich in pardon for mankind despite their
               wrong, and <span class="emph">lo!</span> thy Lord is strong in punishment.</span>
            </div>(7) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ ۗ
            إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">And the Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" But
            thou art truly a warner, and to every people a guide.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those who disbelieve say: If only some portent were sent down upon him from his
            <span class="emph">Lord!</span> Thou art a warner only, and for every folk a guide. </div>(8) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">اللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَحْمِلُ كُلُّ أُنْثَىٰ وَمَا تَغِيضُ
               الْأَرْحَامُ وَمَا تَزْدَادُ ۖ وَكُلُّ شَيْءٍ عِنْدَهُ
               بِمِقْدَارٍ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Allah doth know what every female (womb) doth bear, by how much the wombs fall
            short (of their time or nber) or do exceed. Every single thing is before His sight,
            in
            (due) proportion.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Allah knoweth that which every female beareth and that which the wombs absorb
            and that which they grow. And everything with Him is measured. </div>(9) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="amplification">عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ الْكَبِيرُ
               الْمُتَعَالِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">He knoweth the unseen and that which is open: He is <span class="amplification">the
               Great</span>, <span class="amplification">the Most High</span>.</div>
         <div lang="en"> He is the <span class="amplification">Knower of the Invisible and the
               Visible</span>,<span class="amplification"> the Great</span>,
            <span class="amplification">the High Exalted</span>. </div>(10) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="contrast">سَوَاءٌ مِنْكُمْ مَنْ أَسَرَّ الْقَوْلَ وَمَنْ
               جَهَرَ بِهِ وَمَنْ هُوَ مُسْتَخْفٍ بِاللَّيْلِ وَسَارِبٌ
               بِالنَّهَارِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it
            openly; whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by day.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="contrast">Alike of you is he who hideth the saying and he who
               noiseth it abroad</span>, <span class="contrast">he who lurketh in the
               night and he who goeth freely in the daytime.</span>
            </div>(11) 
         <div lang="ar">لَهُ مُعَقِّبَاتٌ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ يَحْفَظُونَهُ مِنْ
            أَمْرِ اللَّهِ ۗ <span class="anaphora">إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُغَيِّرُ مَا
               بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّىٰ يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنْفُسِهِم</span>ْ ۗ وَإِذَا أَرَادَ
            اللَّهُ بِقَوْمٍ سُوءًا فَلَا مَرَدَّ لَهُ ۚ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ مِنْ وَالٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">For each (such person) there are (angels) in succession, before and behind him:
            They guard him by command of Allah. Allah does not change a people's lot unless they
            change what is in their hearts. But when (once) Allah willeth a people's punishment,
            there can be no turning it back, nor will they find, besides Him, any to protect.</div>
         <div lang="en"> For him are angels ranged before him and behind him, who guard him by Allah's
            command. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> Allah changeth not the condition of a folk until they (first)
            change that which is in their hearts; and if Allah willeth misfortune for a folk there
            is none that can repel it, nor have they a defender beside Him. </div>(12) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">هُوَ الَّذِي يُرِيكُمُ الْبَرْقَ خَوْفًا وَطَمَعًا وَيُنْشِئُ
               السَّحَابَ الثِّقَالَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="anaphora">It is He Who doth</span> show you the
            lightning, by way both of fear and of hope: <span class="anaphora">It is He Who
               doth</span> raise up the clouds, heavy with (fertilising)
            rain<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> He it is Who <span class="imagery">showeth you the lightning, a fear and a hope, and
               raiseth the heavy clouds.</span>
            </div>(13) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَيُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ مِنْ خِيفَتِهِ
               وَيُرْسِلُ الصَّوَاعِقَ فَيُصِيبُ بِهَا مَنْ يَشَاءُ</span> وَهُمْ يُجَادِلُونَ
            فِي اللَّهِ <span class="amplification">وَهُوَ شَدِيدُ الْمِحَالِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="imagery">Nay, thunder repeateth His praises, and so do the angels, with awe: He
               flingeth the loud-voiced thunder-bolts</span>, and therewith He striketh
            whomsoever He will..yet these (are the men) who (dare to) dispute about Allah, with
            the
            strength of His power (supreme)<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> The thunder hymneth His praise and (so do) the angels for awe of Him.
            <span class="imagery">He launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them</span> whom He will
            while they dispute (in doubt) concerning Allah, and He is mighty in wrath. </div>(14) 
         <div lang="ar">لَهُ دَعْوَةُ الْحَقِّ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ لَا يَسْتَجِيبُونَ
            لَهُمْ بِشَيْءٍ <span class="simile">إِلَّا كَبَاسِطِ كَفَّيْهِ إِلَى
               الْمَاءِ</span> لِيَبْلُغَ فَاهُ وَمَا هُوَ بِبَالِغِهِ ۚ وَمَا دُعَاءُ
            الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلَالٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">For Him (alone) is prayer in <span class="motif">Truth</span>:
            <span class="imagery">any others that they call upon besides Him hear them no more than if they
               were to stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches
               them not</span>: for the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile)
            wandering (in the mind).</div>
         <div lang="en"> Unto Him is the real prayer. Those unto whom they pray beside Allah respond to
            them not at all, <span class="simile">save as (is the response to) one who
               stretcheth forth his hands toward water (asking) that it may come unto his mouth,
               and it will never reach it</span>. The prayer of disbelievers goeth (far)
            astray. </div>(15) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلِلَّهِ يَسْجُدُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
            وَظِلَالُهُمْ بِالْغُد ُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ ۩</div>
         <div lang="en">Whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth do prostrate themselves
            to Allah (Acknowledging subjection),- with good-will or in spite of themselves: so
            do
            their shadows in the morning and evenings.</div>
         <div lang="en"> And unto Allah falleth prostrate whosoever is in the heavens and the earth,
            willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening hours.
            </div>(16) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="rhetoricalQuestion">قُلْ مَنْ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ قُلِ اللَّهُ ۚ
               قُلْ أَفَاتَّخَذْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ لَا يَمْلِكُونَ لِأَنْفُسِهِمْ
               نَفْعًا وَلَا ضَرًّا ۚ <span class="parallelism">قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي
                  الْأَعْمَىٰ وَالْبَصِيرُ أَمْ هَلْ تَسْتَوِي الظُّلُمَاتُ
                  وَالنُّورُ</span> ۗ أَمْ جَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ شُرَكَاءَ خَلَقُوا كَخَلْقِهِ
               فَتَشَابَهَ الْخَلْقُ عَلَيْهِمْ ۚ </span><span class="amplification">قُلِ اللَّهُ
               خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Say: "Who is <span class="amplification">the Lord and Sustainer of the heavens and the
               earth</span>?" Say: "(It is) Allah." Say: "Do ye then take (for worship)
            protectors other than Him, such as have no power either for good or for harm to
            themselves?" Say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"Are the blind equal with those who
               see?</span>
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Or the depths of darkness equal with light?"</span>
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Or do they assign to Allah partners who have created (anything) as
               He has created, so that the creation seemed to them similar?</span>
            Say: "Allah is <span class="amplification">the Creator of all things</span>: He is
            <span class="amplification">the One</span>, <span class="amplification">the Supreme and
               Irresistible</span>."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Say (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>): Who is <span class="amplification">Lord of the heavens and the
               earth</span>? Say: Allah. Say: Take ye then (others) beside Him for
            protectors, which, even for themselves, have neither benefit nor hurt? Say: Is the
            blind
            man equal to the seer, or is darkness equal to light? Or assign they unto Allah partners
            who created the like of His creation so that the creation (which they made and His
            creation) seemed alike to them? Say: Allah is the <span class="amplification">Creator of all
               things</span>, and He is <span class="amplification">the One</span>,
            <span class="amplification">the Almighty</span>. </div>(17) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">أَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَسَالَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِهَا
               فَاحْتَمَلَ السَّيْلُ زَبَدًا رَابِيًا ۚ وَمِمَّا يُوقِدُونَ عَلَيْهِ فِي النَّارِ
               ابْتِغَاءَ حِلْيَةٍ أَوْ مَتَاعٍ زَبَدٌ <span class="simile">مِثْلُهُ ۚ
                  كَذَٰلِكَ يَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْحَقَّ وَالْبَاطِلَ</span> ۚ فَأَمَّا
               الزَّبَدُ فَيَذْهَبُ جُفَاءً ۖ وَأَمَّا مَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ فَيَمْكُثُ فِي
               الْأَرْضِ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="imagery">He sends down water from the skies, and the channels flow, each
               according to its measure: But the torrent bears away to foam that mounts up to the
               surface.</span> Even so, from that (ore) which they heat in the fire, to make
            ornaments or utensils therewith, there is a scum likewise. Thus doth Allah (by parables)
            show forth <span class="motif">Truth</span> and Vanity. <span class="simile">For the scum disappears like forth cast out;</span> while that
            which is for the good of mankind remains on the earth. Thus doth Allah set forth
            parables.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="imagery">He sendeth down water from the sky, so that valleys flow according to their
               measure, and the flood beareth (on its surface) swelling foam - from that which they
               smelt in the fire in order to make ornaments and tools riseth a foam like unto it
               </span> - thus Allah coineth (the similitude of) the true and the false. Then, as for
            <span class="simile">the foam, it passeth away as scum upon the
               banks</span>, while, as for that which is of use to mankind, it remaineth in
            the earth. Thus Allah coineth the similitudes. </div>(18) 
         <div lang="ar">لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمُ الْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ
            يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَهُ لَوْ أَنَّ لَهُمْ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ
            لَافْتَدَوْا بِهِ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ سُوءُ الْحِسَابِ وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۖ
            وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ</div>
         <div lang="en">For those who respond to their Lord, are (all) good things. But those who
            respond not to Him,- Even if they had all that is in the heavens and on earth, and
            as
            much more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom. For them will the reckoning be
            terrible: their abode will be Hell,- what a bed of misery<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> For those who answered Allah's call is bliss; and for those who answered not
            His call, if they had all that is in the earth, and therewith the like thereof, they
            would proffer it as ransom. Such will have a woeful reckoning, and their habitation
            will
            be hell, a dire abode. </div>(19) 
         <div lang="ar">أَفَمَنْ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ الْحَقُّ <span class="simile">كَمَنْ هُوَ أَعْمَىٰ</span> ۚ إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو
            الْأَلْبَابِ</div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="simile">Is then one who doth know that that which hath been
               revealed unto thee from thy Lord is the <span class="motif">Truth</span>, like one who is blind?</span> It is those who are
            endued with understanding that receive admonition;- </div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion"><span class="simile">Is he who knoweth that what is revealed
                  unto thee from thy Lord is the truth like him who is
                  blind?</span></span> But only men of understanding heed; </div>(20) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">الَّذِينَ يُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ
               وَلَا يَنْقُضُونَ الْمِيثَاقَ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and fail not in their plighted
            word;</div>
         <div lang="en"> Such as keep the pact of Allah, and break not the covenant; </div>(21) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">وَالَّذِينَ يَصِلُونَ مَا أَمَرَ
               اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ وَيَخَافُونَ سُوءَ
               الْحِسَابِ</span>
            </div>
         <div lang="en">Those who join together those things which Allah hath commanded to be joined,
            hold their Lord in awe, and fear the terrible reckoning;</div>
         <div lang="en"> Such as <span class="motif">unite that which Allah hath commandeth
               should be joined</span>, and fear their Lord, and dread a woeful reckoning; </div>(22) 
         <div lang="ar">وَالَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا ابْتِغَاءَ وَجْهِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
            وَأَنْفَقُوا مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ سِرًّا وَعَلَانِيَةً وَيَدْرَءُونَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ
            السَّيِّئَةَ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمْ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ</div>
         <div lang="en">Those who patiently persevere, seeking the countenance of their Lord; Establish
            regular prayers; spend, out of (the gifts) We have bestowed for their sustenance,
            secretly and openly; and turn off Evil with good: for such there is the final attainment
            of the (eternal) home,-</div>
         <div lang="en"> Such as persevere in seeking their Lord's Countenance and are regular in
            prayer and spend of that which We bestow upon them secretly and openly, and overcome
            evil with good. Theirs will be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home, </div>(23) 
         <div lang="ar">جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ يَدْخُلُونَهَا وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ
            وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ ۖ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ يَدْخُلُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ كُلِّ بَابٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">Gardens of perpetual bliss: they shall enter there, as well as the righteous
            among their fathers, their spouses, and their offspring: and angels shall enter unto
            them from every gate (with the salutation):</div>
         <div lang="en"> Gardens of Eden which they enter, along with all who do right of their fathers
            and their helpmeets and their seed. The angels enter unto them from every gate, </div>(24) 
         <div lang="ar">سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ ۚ فَنِعْمَ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ</div>
         <div lang="en">"Peace unto you for that ye persevered in patience<span class="emph">!</span> Now how
            excellent is the final home<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> (Saying): Peace be unto you because ye persevered. Ah, passing sweet will be
            the sequel of the (heavenly) Home. </div>(25) 
         <div lang="ar">وَالَّذِينَ يَنْقُضُونَ عَهْدَ اللَّهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مِيثَاقِهِ وَيَقْطَعُونَ مَا
            أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۙ أُولَٰئِكَ لَهُمُ
            اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ</div>
         <div lang="en">But those who break the Covenant of Allah, after having plighted their word
            thereto, and cut asunder those things which Allah has commanded to be joined, and
            work
            mischief in the land;- on them is the curse; for them is the terrible
            home<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And those who break the covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and <span class="motif">sever that which Allah hath commanded should be joined</span>,
            and make mischief in the earth: theirs is the curse and theirs the ill abode. </div>(26) 
         <div lang="ar">اللَّهُ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ ۚ وَفَرِحُوا بِالْحَيَاةِ
            الدُّنْيَا وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فِي الْآخِرَةِ إِلَّا مَتَاعٌ</div>
         <div lang="en">Allah doth enlarge, or grant by (strict) measure, the sustenance (which He
            giveth) to whomso He pleaseth. (The wordly) rejoice in the life of this world: But
            the
            life of this world is but little comfort in the Hereafter.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Allah enlargeth livelihood for whom He will, and straiteneth (it for whom He
            will); and they rejoice in the life of the world, whereas the life of the world is
            but
            brief comfort as compared with the Hereafter. </div>(27) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ ۗ
            قُلْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ أَنَابَ</div>
         <div lang="en">The Unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say:
            "Truly Allah leaveth, to stray, whom He will; But He guideth to Himself those who
            turn
            to Him in penitence,-</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those who disbelieve say: If only a portent were sent down upon him from his
            Lord<span class="emph">!</span> Say: <span class="emph">Lo!</span> Allah sendeth whom He will astray, and
            guideth unto Himself all who turn (unto Him), </div>(28) 
         <div lang="ar">الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۗ أَلَا بِذِكْرِ
            اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ</div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="parallelism">Those who believe, and whose hearts find
               satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah: for without doubt in the remembrance of
               Allah do hearts find satisfaction.</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> Who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of Allah.
            <span class="emph">Verily</span> in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find rest! </div>(29) 
         <div lang="ar">الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَىٰ لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ مَآبٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">"For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every) blessedness, and a
            beautiful place of (final) return."</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those who believe and do right: Joy is for them, and bliss (their) journey's
            end. </div>(30) 
         <div lang="ar">كَذَٰلِكَ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ فِي أُمَّةٍ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهَا أُمَمٌ
            لِتَتْلُوَ عَلَيْهِمُ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَهُمْ يَكْفُرُونَ
            <span class="amplification">بِالرَّحْمَٰنِ ۚ قُلْ هُوَ رَبِّي لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ عَلَيْهِ
               تَوَكَّلْتُ وَإِلَيْهِ مَتَابِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Thus have we sent thee amongst a People before whom (long since) have (other)
            Peoples (gone and) passed away; in order that thou mightest rehearse unto them what
            We
            send down unto thee by inspiration; yet do they reject (Him), the <span class="amplification">Most
               Gracious</span><span class="emph">!</span> Say: "He is my Lord<span class="emph">!</span> There is no
            god but He<span class="emph">!</span> On Him is my trust, and to Him do I turn<span class="emph">!</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> Thus We send thee (<span class="emph">O</span>
            <span class="name">Muhammad</span>) unto a nation, before whom other nations have passed away, that
            thou mayst recite unto them that which We have inspired in thee, while they are
            disbelievers in the Beneficent. Say: He is my Lord; there is no Allah save Him. In
            Him
            do I put my trust and unto Him is my recourse. </div>(31) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">وَلَوْ أَنَّ قُرْآنًا سُيِّرَتْ بِهِ الْجِبَالُ أَوْ قُطِّعَتْ بِهِ
               الْأَرْضُ أَوْ كُلِّمَ بِهِ الْمَوْتَىٰ</span> ۗ بَلْ لِلَّهِ الْأَمْرُ جَمِيعًا
            ۗ أَفَلَمْ يَيْأَسِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ لَوْ يَشَاءُ اللَّهُ لَهَدَى النَّاسَ
            جَمِيعًا ۗ وَلَا يَزَالُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا تُصِيبُهُمْ بِمَا صَنَعُوا قَارِعَةٌ أَوْ
            تَحُلُّ قَرِيبًا مِنْ دَارِهِمْ حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ وَعْدُ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا
            يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ</div>
         <div lang="en">If there were a Qur'an with which mountains were moved, or the earth were
            cloven asunder, or the dead were made to speak, (this would be the one<span class="emph">!</span>)
            But, truly, the command is with Allah in all things<span class="emph">!</span> Do not the Believers
            know, that, had Allah (so) willed, He could have guided all mankind (to the right)?
            But
            the Unbelievers,- never will disaster cease to seize them for their (ill) deeds, or
            to
            settle close to their homes, until the promise of Allah come to pass, for,
            <span class="emph">verily</span>, Allah will not fail in His promise.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Had it been possible for a <span class="imagery">Lecture to cause the mountains to move, or
               the earth to be torn asunder, or the dead to speak,</span> (this Qur'an would
            have done so). Nay, but Allah's is the whole command. <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Do not those
               who believe know that, had Allah willed, He could have guided all
               mankind?</span> As for those who disbelieve, disaster ceaseth not to
            strike them because of what they do, or it dwelleth near their home until the threat
            of
            Allah come to pass. <span class="emph">Lo!</span> Allah faileth not to keep the tryst. </div>(32) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدِ اسْتُهْزِئَ بِرُسُلٍ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فَأَمْلَيْتُ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
            ثُمَّ أَخَذْتُهُمْ ۖ <span class="amplification">فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عِقَابِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Mocked were (many) messengers before thee: but I granted respite to the
            unbelievers, and finally I punished them: Then how (terrible) was my
            requital<span class="emph">!</span></div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="emph">verily</span> messengers (of Allah) were mocked before thee, but
            long I bore with those who disbelieved. At length I seized them, and
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">how (awful) was My punishment<span class="emph">!</span></span>
            </div>(33) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="motif">أَفَمَنْ هُوَ قَائِمٌ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ نَفْسٍ
               بِمَا كَسَبَتْ</span> ۗ وَجَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ شُرَكَاءَ قُلْ سَمُّوهُمْ ۚ أَمْ
            تُنَبِّئُونَهُ بِمَا لَا يَعْلَمُ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ بِظَاهِرٍ مِنَ الْقَوْلِ ۗ بَلْ
            زُيِّنَ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مَكْرُهُمْ وَصُدُّوا عَنِ السَّبِيلِ ۗ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ
            اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ</div>
         <div lang="en">Is then He who standeth over every soul (and knoweth) all that it doth, (like
            any others)? And yet they ascribe partners to Allah. Say: <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">"But name
               them<span class="emph">!</span> is it that ye will inform Him of something he knoweth not on
               earth, or is it (just) a show of words?"</span>
            <span class="emph">Nay!</span> to those who believe not, their pretence seems pleasing, but they are
            kept back (thereby) from the path. And those whom Allah leaves to stray, no one can
            guide.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">Is He Who is aware of the deserts of every soul (as he who is aware
               of nothing)?</span> Yet they ascribe unto Allah partners. Say: Name
            them. Is it that ye would inform Him of something which He knoweth not in the earth?
            Or
            is it but a way of speaking? Nay but their contrivance is made seeming fair for those
            who disbelieve and they are kept from the right road. He whom Allah sendeth astray,
            for
            him there is no guide. </div>(34) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="parallelism">لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ
               الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ</span> أَشَقُّ ۖ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ
            مِنْ وَاقٍ</div>
         <div lang="en"><span class="parallelism">For them is a penalty in the life of this
               world, but harder, truly, is the penalty of the Hereafter:</span> and defender
            have they none against Allah.</div>
         <div lang="en"> For them is torment in the life of the world, and <span class="emph">verily</span> the doom
            of the Hereafter is more painful, and they have no defender from Allah. </div>(35) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="imagery">مَثَلُ الْجَنَّةِ الَّتِي وُعِدَ الْمُتَّقُونَ ۖ تَجْرِي مِنْ
               تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ ۖ أُكُلُهَا دَائِمٌ وَظِلُّهَا ۚ تِلْكَ عُقْبَى الَّذِينَ
               اتَّقَوْا ۖ وَعُقْبَى الْكَافِرِينَ النَّارُ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">The parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised<span class="emph">!</span>-
            beneath it flow rivers: perpetual is the enjoyment thereof and the shade therein:
            such
            is the end of the Righteous; and the end of Unbelievers in the Fire.</div>
         <div lang="en"> A similitude of the Garden which is promised unto those who keep their duty
            (to Allah): <span class="imagery">Underneath it rivers flow; its food is everlasting, and its
               shade</span>; <span class="parallelism">this is the reward of those who
               keep their duty, while the reward of disbelievers is the Fire.</span>
            </div>(36) 
         <div lang="ar">وَالَّذِينَ آتَيْنَاهُمُ الْكِتَابَ يَفْرَحُونَ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ ۖ
            وَمِنَ الْأَحْزَابِ مَنْ يُنْكِرُ بَعْضَهُ ۚ قُلْ إِنَّمَا أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ
            اللَّهَ وَلَا أُشْرِكَ بِهِ ۚ <span class="amplification">إِلَيْهِ أَدْعُو وَإِلَيْهِ
               مَآبِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Those to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what hath been revealed unto
            thee: but there are among the clans those who reject a part thereof. Say: "I am
            commanded to worship Allah, and not to join partners with Him. <span class="parallelism">Unto Him do I call, and unto Him is my
               return.</span>"</div>
         <div lang="en"> Those unto whom We gave the Scripture rejoice in that which is revealed unto
            thee. And of the clans there are who deny some of it. Say: I am commanded only that
            I
            serve Allah and ascribe unto Him no partner. <span class="anaphora">Unto Him I
               cry, and unto Him is my return.</span>
            </div>(37) 
         <div lang="ar">وَكَذَٰلِكَ أَنْزَلْنَاهُ حُكْمًا عَرَبِيًّا ۚ وَلَئِنِ اتَّبَعْتَ
            أَهْوَاءَهُمْ بَعْدَمَا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ <span class="motif">مَا
               لَكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ وَلَا وَاقٍ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Thus have We revealed it to be a judgment of authority in Arabic. Wert thou to
            follow their (vain) desires after the knowledge which hath reached thee, then wouldst
            thou find neither protector nor defender against Allah.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Thus have We revealed it, a decisive utterance in Arabic; and if thou shouldst
            follow their desires after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge, then truly
            wouldst thou have from Allah no protecting friend nor defender. </div>(38) 
         <div lang="ar">وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلًا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
            وَذُرِّيَّةً ۚ وَمَا كَانَ لِرَسُولٍ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِآيَةٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ
            ۗ
            لِكُلِّ أَجَلٍ كِتَابٌ</div>
         <div lang="en">We did send messengers before thee, and appointed for them wives and children:
            and it was never the part of a messenger to bring a sign except as Allah permitted
            (or
            commanded). For each period is a Book (revealed).</div>
         <div lang="en"> And <span class="emph">verily</span> We sent messengers (to mankind) before thee, and We
            appointed for them wives and offspring, and it was not (given) to any messenger that
            he
            should bring a portent save by Allah's leave. For everything there is a time prescribed.
            </div>(39) 
         <div lang="ar">يَمْحُو اللَّهُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ ۖ وَعِنْدَهُ <span class="name">أُمُّ
               الْكِتَابِ</span></div>
         <div lang="en">Allah doth blot out or confirm what He pleaseth: with Him is the Mother of the
            Book.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="parallelism">Allah effaceth what He will, and establisheth (what He
               will)</span>, and with Him is the source of ordinance. </div>(40) 
         <div lang="ar">وَإِنْ مَا نُرِيَنَّكَ بَعْضَ الَّذِي نَعِدُهُمْ أَوْ نَتَوَفَّيَنَّكَ
            فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ</div>
         <div lang="en">Whether We shall show thee (within thy life-time) part of what we promised them
            or take to ourselves thy soul (before it is all accomplished),- thy duty is to make
            (the
            Message) reach them: it is our part to call them to account.</div>
         <div lang="en"> Whether We let thee see something of that which We have promised them, or make
            thee die (before its happening), thine is but conveyance (of the message). Ours the
            reckoning. </div>(41) 
         <div lang="ar"><span class="rhetoricalQuestion">أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا نَأْتِي الْأَرْضَ نَنْقُصُهَا مِنْ
               أَطْرَافِهَا</span> ۚ وَاللَّهُ يَحْكُمُ لَا مُعَقِّبَ لِحُكْمِهِ ۚ
            وَهُوَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ</div>
         <div lang="en">See they not that We gradually reduce the land (in their control) from its
            outlying borders? <span class="parallelism">(Where) Allah commands, there is none
               to put back His Command:</span> and He is swift in calling to account.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="rhetoricalQuestion">See they not how we aim to the land, reducing it of its outlying
               parts? </span><span class="anaphora">(When) Allah doometh there
               is none that can postpone His doom</span>, and He is swift at reckoning. </div>(42) 
         <div lang="ar">وَقَدْ مَكَرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَلِلَّهِ الْمَكْرُ جَمِيعًا ۖ
            <span class="motif">يَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ۗ
               وَسَيَعْلَمُ</span> الْكُفَّارُ لِمَنْ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ</div>
         <div lang="en">Those before them did (also) devise plots; but in all things the
            master-planning is Allah's He knoweth the doings of every soul: and soon will the
            Unbelievers know who gets home in the end.</div>
         <div lang="en">
            <span class="contrast">Those who were before them plotted; but all plotting is
               Allah's</span>. He knoweth that which each soul earneth. The disbelievers will
            come to know for whom will be the sequel of the (heavenly) Home. </div>(43) 
         <div lang="ar">وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَسْتَ مُرْسَلًا ۚ قُلْ كَفَىٰ بِاللَّهِ شَهِيدًا
            بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ</div>
         <div lang="en">The Unbelievers say: "No messenger art thou." Say: "Enough for a witness
            between me and you is Allah, and such as have knowledge of the Book."</div>
         <div lang="en"> They who disbelieve say: Thou art no messenger (of Allah). Say: Allah, and
            whosoever hath knowledge of the Scripture, is sufficient witness between me and you.
            </div>
      </main>
   </body>
</html>