<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Website/style.css"/>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Website/readingview.css"/><script type="application/javascript" src="../Website/readingview.js"></script><title>Surah 1</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="checkbox-container"><label><input type="checkbox" name="amplification"/>Amplification</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="emph"/>Emphasis</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="irony"/>Irony</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="imagery"/>Imagery</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="allusion"/>Allusion</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="contrast"/>Contrast</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="name"/>Name</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="place"/>Place</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="rhetoricalQuestion"/>Rhetorical
            Question</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="motif"/>Motif</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="anaphora"/>Anaphora</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="parallelism"/>Parallelism</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="metaphor"/>Metaphor</label><label><input type="checkbox" id="simile"/>Simile</label></div>
      <main>
         <div lang="">(1) الرَّحْمَٰنِ
            الرَّحِيمِبِسْمِ اللَّهِ</div>
         <div lang="">(1)  In the name of Allah,Most Gracious,
            Most Merciful.</div>
         <div lang="">(1)  In the name of Allah, Most Gracious,
            Most Merciful.</div>
         <div lang="">(1)  In the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
            the Merciful. </div>
         <div lang="">(2) الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ
            رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ</div>
         <div lang="">(2) 
            Praise be to Allah, the
            Cherisher and Sustainer of the
            worlds;</div>
         <div lang="">(2)  Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and
            Sustainer of the worlds;</div>
         <div lang="">(2) 
            Praise be to Allah, Lord of the
            Worlds, </div>
         <div lang="">(3) الرَّحْمَٰنِ
            الرَّحِيمِ</div>
         <div lang="">(3) 
            Most Gracious, Most
            Merciful; </div>
         <div lang="">(3)  &gt;Most Gracious, Most
            Merciful; </div>
         <div lang="">(3) 
            The Beneficent, the
            Merciful. </div>
         <div lang="">(4) مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ</div>
         <div lang="">(4) 
            Master of the Day of Judgment.
            </div>
         <div lang="">(4) 
            Master of the Day of Judgment, </div>
         <div lang="">(5) إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ
            نَسْتَعِينُ</div>
         <div lang="">(5)  Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek.</div>
         <div lang="">(5)  Thee (alone) we worship; Thee (alone) we ask
            for help.
            </div>
         <div lang="">(6) اهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ</div>
         <div lang="">(6)  Show us the straight way,</div>
         <div lang="">(6)  Show us the straight path, </div>
         <div lang="">(7) صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ غَيْرِ الْمَغْضُوبِ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا
            الضَّالِّينَ</div>
         <div lang="">(7)  The way of those on whom Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace, those whose (portion) is
            not wrath, and who go not astray. </div>
         <div lang="">(7)  The way of those on whom Thou hast bestowed Thy Grace, those whose (portion) is
            not wrath, and who go not astray. </div>
         <div lang="">(7)  The path of those whom Thou hast favoured; Not the (path) of those who earn
            Thine anger nor of those who go astray. </div>
      </main>
   </body>
</html>